   #» Feed » Comments Feed » “This job sucks my soul!” Comments Feed
   oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML) JSON

--
          + Podcast

“This job sucks my soul!”

   Soul Crushing

   This is a phrase that I’ve heard hundreds of times over the past 30
--
   workday to cultivate their ideals, or develop their hobbies and
   interests, or nurture their relationships and families—nothing left to
   do “soul care.”

   They are usually reliable, dependable, competent people who are
--
   is frightening to say the least.

   What is your soul?

   So, what do people mean when they use this phrase, “This job sucks my
   soul”?  I suggest that what they are saying in this context of work is
   that they feel they are losing their self, their individuality–dare I
   say, losing what makes them unique, sacred, or special to themselves
   and others.  In this sense, if they lose their soul, they disappear
   from us.

   The soul then is not just some immaterial or spiritual part of us.
   Instead, it is the sum total of all our parts but greater than the sum
   of those parts.  Human beings are many things–physical, emotional,
--
   cultural, and storytelling beings.

   I think these people know instinctively, intuitively that the soul
   isn’t the single most important part of you because it isn’t a part: it
   is you.  You are your soul.  When we come down to the individuality of
   a person, we are looking into their soul. It is inextricably linked to
   our life and how we live our lives.

   When someone says, “This job sucks my soul!”, it is easy to toss it off
   as an exaggerated complaint. But I know too well that career pain is
   real, that our work issues often mask existential issues:  Who am I?
   Why am I here?  What is the purpose of all this?

   Soul and career

   The word “career” is derived from the Latin root carrus meaning
   “wheeled vehicle.”  When we start out in our career, we become part of
   a universal journey paradigm—finding our way in the world, or finding
   our soul, or finding our way home.

   I know that we are now getting into the realms of philosophy and
--
   stake.

   Finding your soul is really about making choices and decisions.  I hope
   that I can help you make them.

