   Spirituality

Have You Been Called An Old Soul? Here's What That Really Means

   Sarah Regan
--

   Are you a curious, wise, or all-around calm person? You might just be
   an old soul. Whether you've been called it before or always had a
   feeling you were, what does being an old soul really mean? Here, we
   dive into the true meaning, plus, the signs to look out for that you
   could be an old soul.

What does "old soul" really mean?

   It's likely you know an old soul when you meet one. They probably seem
   wise beyond their years, mature, grounded, and aren't interested in
   superficial things. According to intuitive counselor Randi Merzon, the
   concept of the old soul is inspired by the idea that our bodies are
   containers for spirit, and an old soul "is someone who continues to
   reincarnate in order to heal or complete karmic agreements."

   Of course, depending on what you believe and how you relate to
   spirituality, another way of thinking about old souls is the idea that
   we're all perhaps different incarnations of universal life force, and
   those old souls are simply tapped into that wisdom on a deeper level
   (and from an earlier age) during that lifetime.

   As spiritual guide and author of Sacred Landscapes of the Soul, Karen
   Brailsford tells mbg, "I believe there's a timelessness or eternality
   we all have access to—this innate wisdom and core truth. In some ways,
   one might say we're all old souls, and maybe in different lifetimes
   we're exploring different aspects of that."

Is it a good thing to be an old soul?

   It's usually a compliment to be referred to as an old soul, as it
   implies grace and wisdom. But there can be downsides to being mature
   beyond your years. As Merzon explains, "No one enjoys being a newbie,
   but in fact, the benefit of being a new soul is that they carry around
   a lot less karma."

   She adds that old souls come into this life with an agenda to
   experience and complete karma, while new souls "want to make form out
   of light," and "experience what it's like to be a being in a body." As
   such, the new souls' experience is a bit more lighthearted, where being
   an old soul can feel heavy. But in addition to that, because the old
   soul comes to this life with more experience and understanding, they're
   able to handle obstacles and challenges with greater clarity.

   And going back to Brailsford's point, it comes down to what the new
   versus old soul is experiencing in this life. A new soul "wants to be
   fresh and new and maybe have a more hedonistic lifestyle," while an old
   soul "wants to go into the depths and learn." Old souls may also feel
   somewhat isolated, as they can see through much of the illusion and
   separation in modern culture.

11 characteristics of old souls:

   1.
--
You have an inquisitive, curious mind.

   Old souls very much prioritize truth and wisdom. As such, they often
   have curious minds about what's happening in the world and internally
   "but not in a superficial way," Brailsford notes. "Whether it's world
--
You can see the big picture.

   If you're an old soul, you're likely able to see beyond appearances,
   Brailsford says. You're probably able to let things roll off your back
   easier, and you're less likely to be triggered by certain things. "I'm
--
You may feel like a bit of an outsider.

   According to Merzon, being an old soul can make it difficult to form
   meaningful connections, at least when you're young. "If you're an old
   soul and are still chronologically young, it might take a while to find
   your tribe," she says. And as Brailsford adds, "They might feel like an
   outlier, and they may initially feel that they're alone in this."
   4.

...but you know your fellow old souls when you meet them.

   While it can be difficult to get along with everyone when you're an old
   soul, Brailsford is quick to note that in the long run, old souls are
   actually good at finding their fellow kindred spirits. "A true old soul
   realizes they can't be the only one. Old souls are looking out for one
   another, they're trying to find one another, so they're trying to make
   that connection because they realize there's a connection to be had."
   This is where you see those instantaneous soul connections that run
   very deep.
   5.
--
You feel deeply connected to everything.

   Not only do old souls feel deeply connected to God, spirit, the
   universe—whatever it is they call it—but they also feel that with
   nature, the people in their lives, and even strangers. "An old soul has
   a sense of connection to the universe and therefore to other souls,"
   Brailsford says, adding, "We probably have that connection to everyone,
   but maybe it doesn't show up in this lifetime."
--
You go against the status quo.

   Because old souls can see the big picture and beyond many of the basic
   structures that govern our reality, they like to do things their own
   way. "Old souls are rebellious," Brailsford notes. "They don't just
   think outside of the box—they intuit that the boxes don't even exist
   [...] There's a skepticism, a sense of understanding that everything
--
   than your peers, especially when you were young. As Merzon explains it,
   "There is a knowing that they have been around the block before. You
   may recognize an 'old soul' even in a newborn. Their spirit's wisdom is
   written over their entire body."
   8.
--

   One of those basic structures that we touched on previously would be
   materialism. Simply put, old souls are not concerned with it. They have
   a sense that "we're living in this material world but there's something
   more important, and perhaps the things we've been taught in school, or
--
Your inner world is more important than the outer.

   Not to say you don't care about the outer world, but for old souls,
   their inner growth, journey, and relationship to themselves and spirit
   are often of utmost importance. "The soul is inside, and it's about
   going within," Brailsford notes. You probably spend good amounts of
   time in reflection, deeply pondering your experiences and life lessons.
--
   with anyone in your family. "Having a particular gift, in a particular
   field out of the blue, whether it's an instrument or career or even
   place," Brailsford says, is a sign of an old soul. "There's this sense
   of having a knowing about that thing, that you've done this before."
   11.
--
   getting older in a way, where we have experiences and we keep growing
   and building on them." She compares being born to going on a trip—a
   trip where many forget their luggage. Old souls don't forget their
   luggage, "bringing all of their information and experience with them
   into each incarnation," she says.
--
   or intuition, making one more tuned in to the bigger picture and their
   sense of being. Children who have dealt with trauma may also exhibit
   traits of old souls, as adverse childhood experiences forced them to
   grow up faster than their peers.

How to thrive as an old soul.

   While being wise and über-spiritual may sound great, as mentioned, it
   does come with some difficulties. Whether that be finding your soul
   family or learning how to balance your inner and outer worlds, there
   are ways old souls can be sure to thrive.

   "Surrounding yourself with people who are like-minded, in terms of
--
   and playfulness."

   And of course, given an old soul's rebellious nature, it will be
   imperative for them to figure out a lifestyle that feels fulfilling and
   supportive. As Merzon notes, "I believe an old soul has the ability to
   claim themselves more fully. They want to tailor their life and
   experiences to something that really resonates with them in present
--
The bottom line.

   There are so many ways we can think about souls, old and new. Whether
   we're all varied incarnations of the same soul, or there really are
   souls that are younger versus newer, the bottom line is, most of us can
   imagine what kind of person an "old soul" is and what traits those
   people embody. From deep intuition to a certain stillness in their
   presence, these folks have clearly learned a thing or two early on,
