   The pineal gland is a tiny organ in the center of the brain that played
   an important role in Descartes’ philosophy. He regarded it as the
   principal seat of the soul and the place in which all our thoughts are
   formed. In this entry, we discuss Descartes’ views concerning the
   pineal gland. We also put them into a historical context by describing
--
     * 2. Descartes’ Views on the Pineal Gland
          + 2.1 The Treatise of Man
          + 2.2 Between the Treatise of Man and The Passions of the Soul
          + 2.3 The Passions of the Soul
          + 2.4 Body and Soul
     * 3. Post-Cartesian Development
          + 3.1 Reactions to Descartes’ Views
--
   posterior one. Second, he thought that these ventricles were filled
   with “psychic pneuma,” a fine, volatile, airy or vaporous substance
   which he described as “the first instrument of the soul.” (See Rocca
   2003 for a detailed description of Galen’s views about the anatomy and
   physiology of the brain.)
--
   important variant was due to Avicenna (980–1037 CE), who devised it by
   projecting the psychological distinctions found in Aristotle’s On the
   soul onto the ventricular system of the brain (Rahman 1952).

1.3 Middle Ages

   In a treatise called On the difference between spirit and soul, Qusta
   ibn Luqa (864–923) combined Nemesius’ ventricular localization doctrine
   with Galen’s account of a worm-like part of the brain that controls the
--
   Latin translation in 1662, and then in the original French in 1664), in
   a number of letters written in 1640–41, and in his last book, The
   passions of the soul (1649).

2.1 The Treatise of Man
--
   In the Treatise of man, Descartes did not describe man, but a kind of
   conceptual models of man, namely creatures, created by God, which
   consist of two ingredients, a body and a soul. “These men will be
   composed, as we are, of a soul and a body. First I must describe the
   body on its own; then the soul, again on its own; and finally I must
   show how these two natures would have to be joined and united in order
   to constitute men who resemble us” (AT XI:119, CSM I:99).
   Unfortunately, Descartes did not fulfill all of these promises: he
   discussed only the body and said almost nothing about the soul and its
   interaction with the body.

--
   appetites and passions, and finally the external movements of all the
   limbs” (AT XI:201, CSM I:108). In scholastic philosophy, these
   activities were explained by referring to the soul, but Descartes
   proudly pointed out that he did not have to invoke this notion: “it is
   not necessary to conceive of this machine as having any vegetative or
   sensitive soul or other principle of movement and life, apart from its
   blood and its spirits, which are agitated by the heat of the fire
   burning continuously in its heart—a fire which has the same nature as
--
   H (where the seat of the imagination and the ‘common’ sense is
   located). That is to say, it is only the latter figures which should be
   taken to be the forms or images which the rational soul united to this
   machine will consider directly when it imagines some object or
   perceives it by the senses” (AT XI:176, CSM I:106). It is to be noted
   that the reference to the rational soul is a bit premature at this
   stage of Descartes’ story because he had announced that he would, to
   begin with, discuss only the functions of bodies without a soul.

   Imagination arises in the same way as perception, except that it is not
--
   First, there are movements which are caused by movements of the pineal
   gland. The pineal gland may be moved in three ways: (1) by “the force
   of the soul,” provided that there is a soul in the machine; (2) by the
   spirits randomly swirling about in the ventricles; and (3) as a result
   of stimulation of the sense organs. The role of the pineal gland is
--
   about by motions of the pineal gland.

2.2 Between the Treatise of Man and The Passions of the Soul

   The first remarks about the pineal gland which Descartes published are
--
   within our brain with which we could perceive it. Instead we must hold
   that it is the movements composing this picture which, acting directly
   upon our soul in so far as it is united to our body, are ordained by
   nature to make it have such sensations” (AT VI:130, CSM I:167). This
   remark shows that Descartes tried to avoid the so-called “homuncular
--
   January 1640, AT III:19, CSMK 143), but also added some interesting
   points to the Treatise of man. First, he explained why he regarded it
   as the principal seat of the rational soul (a point that he had not yet
   addressed in the Treatise of man): “My view is that this gland is the
   principal seat of the soul, and the place in which all our thoughts are
   formed. The reason I believe this is that I cannot find any part of the
   brain, except this, which is not double. Since we see only one thing
--
   that the impressions which enter by the two eyes or by the two ears,
   and so on, unite with each other in some part of the body before being
   considered by the soul. Now it is impossible to find any such place in
   the whole head except this gland; moreover it is situated in the most
   suitable possible place for this purpose, in the middle of all the
--
   “Since it is the only solid part in the whole brain which is single, it
   must necessarily be the seat of the common sense, i.e., of thought, and
   consequently of the soul; for one cannot be separated from the other.
   The only alternative is to say that the soul is not joined immediately
   to any solid part of the body, but only to the animal spirits which are
   in its concavities, and which enter it and leave it continually like
--
   movable (29 January 1640, AT III:20, CSMK 143). The pituitary gland is,
   though small, undivided and located in the midline, not the seat of the
   soul because it is outside the brain and entirely immobile (24 December
   1640, AT III:263, CSMK 162). The processus vermiformis of the
   cerebellum (as Descartes called the appendage which Galen had
--
   1 April 1640, AT III:48, CSMK 146). Apart from this, there is also
   another kind of memory, “entirely intellectual, which depends on the
   soul alone” (1 April 1640, AT III:48, CSMK 146).

   Descartes’ thesis that “the pineal gland is the seat of the sensus
--
   destination and is now lost (Lokhorst and Kaitaro 2001).

2.3 The Passions of the Soul

   The most extensive account of Descartes’ pineal neurophysiology and
   pineal neuropsychology is to be found in his The passions of the soul
   (1649), the last book that he published.

   The Passions may be seen as a continuation of the Treatise of man,
   except that the direction of approach is different. The Treatise of man
   starts with the body and announces that the soul will be treated later.
   The conclusion would probably have been that we are indistinguishable
   from the hypothetical “men who resemble us” with which the Treatise of
   man is concerned and that we are just such machines equipped with a
   rational soul ourselves. In the Passions, Descartes starts from the
   other end, with man, and begins by splitting man up into a body and a
   soul.

   Descartes’ criterion for determining whether a function belongs to the
   body or soul was as follows: “anything we experience as being in us,
   and which we see can also exist in wholly inanimate bodies, must be
   attributed only to our body. On the other hand, anything in us which we
   cannot conceive in any way as capable of belonging to a body must be
   attributed to our soul. Thus, because we have no conception of the body
   as thinking in any way at all, we have reason to believe that every
   kind of thought present in us belongs to the soul. And since we do not
   doubt that there are inanimate bodies which can move in as many
   different ways as our bodies, if not more, and which have as much heat
--

   Just before he mentioned the pineal gland for the first time, Descartes
   emphasized that the soul is joined to the whole body: “We need to
   recognize that the soul is really joined to the whole body, and that we
   cannot properly say that it exists in any one part of the body to the
   exclusion of the others. For the body is a unity which is in a sense
   indivisible because of the arrangement of its organs, these being so
   related to one another that the removal of any one of them renders the
   whole body defective. And the soul is of such a nature that it has no
   relation to extension, or to the dimensions or other properties of the
   matter of which the body is composed: it is related solely to the whole
   assemblage of the body’s organs. This is obvious from our inability to
   conceive of a half or a third of a soul, or of the extension which a
   soul occupies. Nor does the soul become any smaller if we cut off some
   part of the body, but it becomes completely separate from the body when
   we break up the assemblage of the body’s organs” (AT XI:351, CSM
   I:339). But even though the soul is joined to the whole body,
   “nevertheless there is a certain part of the body where it exercises
   its functions more particularly than in all the others. […] The part of
   the body in which the soul directly exercises its functions is not the
   heart at all, or the whole of the brain. It is rather the innermost
   part of the brain, which is a certain very small gland situated in the
--
   XI:351, CSM I:340).

   The view that the soul is attached to the whole body is already found
   in St Augustine’s works: “in each body the whole soul is in the whole
   body, and whole in each part of it” (On the Trinity, book 6, ch. 6). St
   Thomas Aquinas accepted this view and explained it by saying that the
   soul is completely present in each part of the body just as whiteness
   is, in a certain sense, completely present in each part of the surface
   of a blank sheet of paper. In deference to Aristotle, he added that
   this does not exclude that some organs (the heart, for example) are
   more important with respect to some of the faculties of the soul than
   others are (Summa theologica, part 1, question 76, art. 8; Quaestiones
   disputatae de anima, art. 10; Summa contra gentiles, book 2, ch. 72).

   Augustine’s and Aquinas’ thesis sounds reasonable as long as the soul
   is regarded as the principle of life. The principle of life may well
   held to be completely present in each living part of the body (just as
   biologists nowadays say that the complete genome is present in each
   living cell). However, Descartes did not regard the soul as the
   principle of life. He regarded it as the principle of thought. This
   makes one wonder what he may have meant by his remark. What would a
   principle of thought be doing in the bones and toes? One might think
   that Descartes meant that, although the pineal gland is the only organ
   to which the soul is immediately joined, the soul is nevertheless
   indirectly joined to the rest of the body by means of the threads and
   spirits in the nerves. But Descartes did not view this as immediate
   attachment: “I do not think that the soul is so imprisoned in the gland
   that it cannot act elsewhere. But utilizing a thing is not the same as
   being immediately joined or united to it” (30 July 1640). Moreover, it
--
   objections to the Meditations, 1641, AT VII:441, CSM II:297). He added
   that he thought that our ideas about gravity are derived from our
   conception of the soul.

   In the secondary literature one often meets the claim that Descartes
   maintained that the soul has no spatial extension, but this claim is
   obviously wrong in view of Descartes’ own assertions. Those who make it
   may have been misled by Descartes’ quite different claim that extension
   is not the principal attribute of the soul, where ‘principal’ has a
   conceptual or epistemic sense.

   Most of the themes discussed in the Treatise of man and in the
   correspondence of 1640 (quoted above) reappear in the Passions of the
   soul, as this summary indicates: “the small gland which is the
   principal seat of the soul is suspended within the cavities containing
   these spirits, so that it can be moved by them in as many different
   ways as there are perceptible differences in the objects. But it can
   also be moved in various different ways by the soul, whose nature is
   such that it receives as many different impressions—that is, it has as
   many different perceptions as there occur different movements in this
   gland. And conversely, the mechanism of our body is so constructed that
   simply by this gland’s being moved in any way by the soul or by any
   other cause, it drives the surrounding spirits towards the pores of the
   brain, which direct them through the nerves to the muscles; and in this
--

   The description of recollection is more vivid than in the Treatise of
   man: “Thus, when the soul wants to remember something, this volition
   makes the gland lean first to one side and then to another, thus
   driving the spirits towards different regions of the brain until they
--
   so the spirits enter into these pores more easily when they come upon
   them, thereby producing in the gland that special movement which
   represents the same object to the soul, and makes it recognize the
   object as the one it wanted to remember” (AT XI:360, CSM I:343).

   The description of the effect of the soul on the body in the causation
   of bodily movement is also more detailed: “And the activity of the soul
   consists entirely in the fact that simply by willing something it
   brings it about that the little gland to which it is closely joined
--
   The pineal neurophysiology of the passions or emotions is similar to
   what is occurring in perception: “the ultimate and most proximate cause
   of the passions of the soul is simply the agitation by which the
   spirits move the little gland in the middle of the brain” (AT XI:371,
   CSM I:349). However, there are some new ingredients which have no
   parallel in the Treatise of man. For example, in a chapter on the
   “conflicts that are usually supposed to occur between the lower part
   and the higher part of the soul,” we read that “the little gland in the
   middle of the brain can be pushed to one side by the soul and to the
   other side by the animal spirits” and that conflicting volitions may
   result in a conflict between “the force with which the spirits push the
   gland so as to cause the soul to desire something, and the force with
   which the soul, by its volition to avoid this thing, pushes the gland
   in a contrary direction” (AT XI:364, CSM I:345).

--
   minds, or the minds of angels” (AT VIII:65, CSM I:242).

2.4 Body and Soul

   One would like to know a little more about the nature of the soul and
   its relationship with the body, but Descartes never proposed a final
   theory about these issues. From passages such as the ones we have just
   quoted one might infer that he was an interactionist who thought that
   there are causal interactions between events in the body and events in
   the soul, but this is by no means the only interpretation that has been
   put forward. In the secondary literature, one finds at least the
   following interpretations.
    1. Descartes was a Scholastic-Aristotelian hylomorphist, who thought
       that the soul is not a substance but the first actuality or
       substantial form of the living body (Hoffman 1986, Skirry 2003).
    2. He was a Platonist who became more and more extreme: “The first
--
       dualism breaks man up into two complete substances, joined to
       another no one knows how: one the one hand, the body which is only
       geometric extension; on the other, the soul which is only
       thought—an angel inhabiting a machine and directing it by means of
       the pineal gland’ (Maritain 1944, p. 179). Not that there is
--
       (Cottingham 1985; Cottingham 1986, ch. 5).
    4. He was a dualistic interactionist, who thought that the rational
       soul and the body have a causal influence on each other. This is
       the interpretation one finds in most undergraduate textbooks (e.g.,
       Copleston 1963, ch. 4).
--
       with them” (Keeling 1963, p. 285).
    6. He was, at least to a certain extent, a non-parallelist because he
       believed that pure actions of the soul, such as doubting,
       understanding, affirming, denying and willing, can occur without
       any corresponding or correlated physiological events taking place
--
   behaviorism and functionalism. But even here one could make a case.
   According to Hoffman (1986) and Skirry (2003), Descartes accepted
   Aristotle’s theory that the soul is the form of the body. According to
   Kneale (1963, p. 839), the latter theory was “a sort of behaviourism”.
   According to Putnam (1975), Nussbaum (1978) and Wilkes (1978), it was
--
   man and had not been able to formulate one comprehensive mind-body
   theory. He sometimes expressed irritation when others reminded him of
   this. In reply to the questions “how can the soul move the body if it
   is in no way material, and how can it receive the forms of corporeal
   objects?” he said that “the most ignorant people could, in a quarter of
--
   deal with in a lifetime; and this is why I have not bothered to answer
   any of them. These questions presuppose amongst other things an
   explanation of the union between the soul and the body, which I have
   not yet dealt with at all” (12 January 1646, AT IX:213, CSM II:275). On
   other occasions, he came close to admitting defeat. “The soul is
   conceived only by the pure intellect; body (i.e. extension, shapes and
   motions) can likewise be known by the intellect alone, but much better
   by the intellect aided by the imagination; and finally what belongs to
   the union of the soul and the body is known only obscurely by the
   intellect alone or even by the intellect aided by the imagination, but
   it is known very clearly by the senses. […] It does not seem to me that
   the human mind is capable of forming a very distinct conception of both
   the distinction between the soul and the body and their union; for to
   do this it is necessary to conceive them as a single thing and at the
   same time to conceive them as two things; and this is absurd” (28 June
--
   because he thought it “very harmful to occupy one’s intellect
   frequently upon meditating upon [the principles of metaphysics which
   give us or knowledge of God and our soul], since this would impede it
   from devoting itself to the functions of the imagination and the
   senses” (AT III:695, CSMK 228). He advised others to do likewise: “one
--
   was still alive, and it was almost universally rejected after his
   death. Willis wrote about the pineal gland that “we can scarce believe
   this to be the seat of the Soul, or its chief Faculties to arise from
   it; because Animals, which seem to be almost quite destitute of
   Imagination, Memory, and other superior Powers of the Soul, have this
   Glandula or Kernel large and fair enough” (Willis 1664, ch. 14, as
   translated in Willis 1681). Steensen (1669) pointed out that Descartes’
--
   arteries but veins. He argued that we know next to nothing about the
   brain. Camper (1784) seems to have been the very last one to uphold the
   Cartesian thesis that the pineal gland is the seat of the soul,
   although one may wonder whether he was completely serious. In
   philosophy, a position called “Cartesian interactionism” immediately
--

   Some of the reasons that Descartes gave for his view that the pineal
   gland is the principal seat of the soul died out more slowly than this
   view itself. For example, his argument that “since our soul is not
   double, but one and indivisible, […] the part of the body to which it
   is most immediately joined should also be single and not divided into a
--
   instance, still played a role when Lancisi (1712) identified the
   unpaired corpus callosum in the midline of the brain as the seat of the
   soul. This view was, however, refuted by Zinn (1749) in a series of
   split-brain experiments on dogs. Lamettrie and many others explicitly
   rejected the thesis that the unity of experience requires a
   corresponding unity of the seat of the soul (Lamettrie 1745, ch. 10).

3.2 Scientific Developments
--
       Boston: David Godine.
     * Wilcox, J.-C., 1985, The Transmission and Influence of Qusta ibn
       Luqa’s “On the Difference between Spirit and the Soul”, Ph.D.
       thesis, City University of New York.
     * Wilkes, K.V., 1978, Physicalism, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
