   Idioms, Phrases, Sayings & Proverbs

The Eyes are the Windows to the Soul: Meaning, Origin and Usage

   ByRichard Barker Updated: February 22, 2025

   ‘The eyes are the windows to the soul’ is such a poignant and profound
   statement. And it’s quite rare that such an ancient phrase continues to
   be used in modern day.
--
   (BUTTON) Table of Contents
     * What is the Meaning of the Phrase 'The Eyes are the Windows to the
       Soul'?
     * What is the Origin of the Phrase 'The Eyes are the Windows to the
       Soul'?
     * How do you Use the Phrase 'The Eyes are the Windows to the Soul'?
     * What are Some Other Ways of Saying ''The Eyes are the Windows to
       the Soul'?
     * Final Thoughts

What is the Meaning of the Phrase ‘The Eyes are the Windows to the Soul’?

   The eyes will show you how a person is feeling, or even what they might
--
   the emotions behind the content being said.

What is the Origin of the Phrase ‘The Eyes are the Windows to the Soul’?

   The phrase has its roots in ancient Roman times from a very similar
--
   6:22-23.

   The precise phrase ‘the eyes are the windows to the soul’ is most
   frequently attributed to the most famous English wordsmith, William
   Shakespeare in the 1500s and 1600s. The full quote is as follows:

   “The eyes are the window to your soul, or was it just an illusion, his
   version of what was, is or could be, conception of a thought brought
   into reality by the wandering of the ever-restless mind of William.”
--
   the 1400s going into the 1500s.

How do you Use the Phrase ‘The Eyes are the Windows to the Soul’?

   Here are a few examples of the phrase in use. This will help you get a
--

   ‘I can see you’re lying, you know – the eyes are the windows to the
   soul.’

   ‘The artist focused on the eyes, believing the eyes are the window to
   the soul.’

   ‘It was love at first sight. You know they say the eyes are the windows
   to the soul.’

   ‘I see you, Pookie, really see you. The eyes are the windows to the
   soul.’

   ‘I knew exactly what she was going to say before she even uttered a
   word. The eyes are the windows to the soul after all.’

   ‘It’s your eyes baby, they get me bricked up. Must be because they’re
   the window to your soul.’

   ‘Are you sure you’re into that heffer?’ ‘It’s the eyes man, windows to
   the soul.’

   ‘You can’t fool me with your lies and your fake words. The eyes are the
   windows to the soul.’

   ‘In your eyes, the window to your soul, I find peace.’

   ‘I feel your sincerity – the eyes are the windows to the soul.’

   ‘Your eyes give you away – they are the windows to your soul after
   all.’

What are Some Other Ways of Saying ‘‘The Eyes are the Windows to the Soul’?

   If you are considering using this phrase with someone from another
--
     * ‘Expressive eyes.’
     * ‘Can you even look me in the eye?’
     * ‘The eyes are the mirrors of the soul.’
     * ‘Let’s pretend the eyes are not the windows to the soul.’
     * ‘Your eyes tell me all I need to know.’

Final Thoughts

   So to sum up, the phrase ‘The eyes are the windows to the soul’ simply
   describes how telling someone’s eyes can be when they express emotion.
   By looking into someone’s eyes, you can ascertain what they are
