    #Islamic Helper » Feed Islamic Helper » Comments Feed Islamic Helper »
   Study of the Soul (Rūh) – A Comprehensive Guide Comments Feed oEmbed
   (JSON) oEmbed (XML) JSON

--
   You are here Home > Al-Akhirah

Study of the Soul (Rūh) – A Comprehensive Guide

   By IslamicHelper / 30/08/2024
   Table of Contents
     * The Soul's Journey: From Creation to the Grave and Beyond
          + Part 1 - Where does the soul come from?

The Soul’s Journey: From Creation to the Grave and Beyond

Part 1 – Where does the soul come from?

   1) Stages of the souls before this world

   The soul of Adam was created and blown into him by Allāh the Most High:
   Allāh said:

--

   “Then, He fashioned him and blew into him from His [Allāh’s]
   spirit/soul.” Sūrah al-Sajdah (32): 8.

   It is ascribed to Allāh [the Arabic texts refer to “His [Allāh’s] Rūh”]
--
     See Al-Jawāb As-Sahīh (4/414).

   The souls of mankind came out the back of Prophet Ādam (Alayhis Salām):
   The Messenger of Allah (ﷺ) said: “When Allāh created Adam He wiped his
   back and every person that He created among his offspring until the Day
--
   forgotten it. If you want to ask about it, then we say to you: It is
   the Fitrah (natural inclination/sound human nature) which is instilled
   in our souls and hearts, that drives us to believe in Allāh and long to
   know Him, may He be glorified.

--
     See Ahkam Ahl adh-Dhimmah (2/949).

   Location of all the souls before they are blown into creation: We have
   no proof from the Qur’ān and Sunnah to mention where the souls of
   mankind are before they are blown into the womb.

   Part 2 – The state of the soul in this world

   The soul goes through different stages in this world. At times it
   leaves us even though we have not died.
     * The soul first enters the body after four months (120 days) roughly
       in the womb:

   The soul (Ruh) enters the foetus at around 120 days (4 months) from
   conception. They have based this duration upon a Qur’anic verse and a
   narration of the Prophet of Allāh ﷺ. Some scholars have differed due to
--
   ordered to write four things. He is ordered to write down his deeds,
   his livelihood, his (date of) death, and whether he will be blessed or
   wretched (in religion). Then the soul is breathed into him…” Sahīh
   Bukhārī (no. 3036).
     * The soul leaves the body while asleep:

   There is clear evidence in the Qur’an and Sunnah which indicates that
   the soul is taken when one falls asleep, and that sleep is a kind of
   death

   Allāh, may He be glorified and exalted, says, “It is Allāh Who takes
   away the souls at the time of their death, and those that die not
   during their sleep. He keeps those (souls) for which He has ordained
   death and sends the rest for a term appointed. Verily, in this are
   signs for a people who think deeply.”
--
   Sūrah Az-Zumar (39): 42.

   Hāfidh Ibn Rajab said: The taking of the soul from the body does not
   necessarily mean that it has departed from the body altogether; rather
   it may be taken whilst some kind of connection is still present, as in
--
     See Fath al-Bāri (3/326) by Hāfidh Ibn Rajab.

     * The soul can travel to other areas as a miracle from Allāh:

   This happened with Umar Ibn Khattāb, a spiritual intuition. Nāfi’ said
--
   Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymīyyah said: We do not deny that people may
   experience some kind of Kashf, whether when awake or in their dreams
   when the soul is less connected to the body, either by means of
   spiritual practices or otherwise

     See Al-Safadīyyah (p. 187-189).

   Part 3 – The state of the soul in the Barzakh

   Souls of the Prophets & Their Graves:

   1) Souls of the Prophets: The Prophet ﷺ is alive in his grave in the
   sense of the life of Al-Barzakh, so he enjoys the blessings that Allāh
   has prepared for him as a reward for his great good actions that he did
--
   Abū Hurairah, that the Messenger of Allāh ﷺ said: “There is no one who
   sends salām upon me, but Allāh, may He be glorified and exalted, will
   restore my soul to me so that I may return his greeting of salām.”
   Ahmad (no. 10434) and Abū Dawūd (2041). Classed as Hasan by al-Albaani.

--
   As-Sahīhah (no. 2853).

   Part 4 – The State of The Souls of the Shuhadā In The Barzakh

   1) Shahīd is alive with Allāh: The martyrs are alive with their Lord. A
--
     provision.” Sūrah ĀlĪ- Imrān (3): 169.

   2) Souls of the Shuhadā are in the crops of green birds:

   Masrūq said: We asked ‘Abdullāh ibn Mas’ūd about this verse, and he
   said: We also asked about that, and he (the Prophet ﷺ) said: “Their
   souls are in the crops of green birds, which have lamps hanging from
   the Throne, and they roam freely wherever they want in Paradise, then
   they return to those lamps. Their Lord looked down upon them and said:
--
   He did that with them three times, and when they saw that they would
   not be left without being asked, they said: ‘O Lord, we want You to
   restore our souls to our bodies so that we may be killed for Your sake
   again.’ When He saw that they had no need, they were left alone.” Sahīh
   Muslim (1887).

   Hāfidh Ibn Kathīr said: With regard to the souls of the martyrs, they
   are in the crops of green birds, and they are like stars in comparison
   to the souls of the ordinary believers, for they fly by themselves. See
   Tafsīr Ibn Kathīr (2/164).

   3) Souls of the Shuhadā are on the banks of the river of Jannah:

   Ibn ‘Abbās said: The Messenger of Allāh ﷺ said: “The martyrs are on the
--
   Ahmad (no. 2386).

   Souls of the Shahīd can be in different locations at different times:
   Hāfidh Ibn Kathīr said: Its chain is Jayyid [Good/Acceptable]. The
   martyrs may be divided into different categories: in some cases, their
   souls are allowed to wander freely in Paradise, and some of them are on
   the banks of this river at the gate of Paradise. It may be the case
   that all of them come to this river and they gather there, and their
--
     Sahīh Muslim (no. 1913).

   Part 5 – Soul of the Righteous Believer

   1) Angels receive the souls of the righteous and take it through the
   heavens:

--
     Al-Albānī in Sahīh Al-Jāmi’ (no. 1676).

   2) The Soul returns to be questioned in the grave:

   It is proven from the Messenger of Allāh ﷺ that when a person dies, his
   soul returns to him in his grave, and he is questioned about his Lord,
   his religion and his Prophet.

--
     Al-Albānī in Sahīh Al-Jāmi’ (no. 1676).

   3) The soul is a bird in Jannah:

   The Prophet ﷺ said, “The souls of the believers are a bird in the trees
   of Jannah until they are returned to their bodies (on the Day of
   Judgement).”
--
     922) of Shaykh Al-Albani and see Fathul-Bāri (3/287)

   4) The connection between the soul and body in the grave:

   Shaykhul Islām Ibn Taymīyyah said: Indeed, the torment and blessing
   happen to both the soul and the body, according to the consensus of the
   Ahlus Sunnah wa’l-Jamā’ah. The soul is blessed or tormented separately
   from the body, and it is blessed or tormented in connection with the
   body. The body is connected to it, so in this case the blessing or
   torment happens to them both, and it may happen to the soul separately
   from the body. See Kitāb Ar-Rūh (p. 51, 52) of Imām Ibn al-Qayyim.

   5) Souls meet each other:

   Allāh’s Messenger ﷺ said: “….the souls of the believers come to him and
   they rejoice more over him than any one of you rejoices when his absent
   loved one comes to him. They ask him: ‘What happened to so-and-so, what
--
     graded Sahīh by Shaykh Al-Albāni.

   Shaykhul Islām Ibn Taymīyyah stated: “When the souls of the living are
   taken by death, they meet with the souls that have already died, and
   they ask the newly deceased about the condition of those still alive.
   See Majmū’ al-Fatāwā (24/303).
--
The Day of Resurrection: Stages and Description of the Hereafter

Conversations of the Souls After Death: What Happens in the Afterlife?

Leave a Comment Cancel Reply
