     * About Us

What Is the Difference Between a Soul and a Spirit?

   Glory Dy
   Christianity.com Contributing Writer
   Updated Dec 16, 2024
   What Is the Difference Between a Soul and a Spirit?

   SHARE

   "The soul, therefore, is a living essence, uncomplicated, incorporeal,
   invisible – in its proper nature – to the eyes of the body, immortal,
   reasoning and intelligent, formless, making use of an organic body and
--
   generation, the intellect being its purest part though not in any way
   alien to it (as the eye is to the body, so the intellect is to the
   soul). It has power over itself, its volition and energy, and is
   mutable, i.e., able to be changed, because it is created. All of these
   features are natural to it through the Grace imparted by its Creator,
--
   has received". ~ John the Damascan

   Question: What is the Difference between someone's soul and spirit? How
   does the Bible distinguish the two?

   This is a question that is not easy to point out in our everyday
   Christian lives. While it is not so difficult to distinguish the body
   from the spirit and the soul, it is particularly difficult to
   distinguish the soul from the spirit. What exactly are their
   differences? Let us consult the Bible once again to give us light on
   these concepts.

Body, Soul, and Spirit in the Bible

   There are a few places in the Bible where the body, soul, and spirit
   are mentioned. One of these is in 1 Thessalonians 5:23:

     "Now may the God of peace himself sanctify you completely, and may
     your whole spirit and soul and body be kept blameless at the coming
     of our Lord Jesus Christ.”

   If we delve into this verse, it clearly states that we are composed of
   three parts: The body, the soul, and the spirit. The verse also uses
   the word “and,” which in the original Greek language means to differ
   from each other. Thus, this clearly states that each part is different
--
   It is easy to distinguish the body as physical, which means using the
   five senses; the sense of sight, the sense of hearing, the sense of
   taste, the sense of smell, and the sense of touch.  The spirit and soul
   are much more difficult because they seem similar but are actually very
   different. They have different functions in our lives as Christians, as
--

     For the word of God is living and active, sharper than any two-edged
     sword, piercing to the division of soul and of spirit, of joints and
     of marrow, and discerning the thoughts and intentions of the heart.

--
   other.

What Is the Difference between Soul and Spirit?

   It is a blessing that we have three parts, the body, the soul, and the
   spirit. All of these parts have specific functions. The body is our
   physical functions and here we feel our physical senses such as the
   sense of sight, taste, smell, hear, and touch. The soul on the other
   hand is our humanity that makes us feel emotions. It is our way to
   magnify God through our human limitations.
--

   Let us imagine a circle on two levels. The outer level is the body,
   followed by the soul and the core is the spirit. Now, let us discuss
   the function of the soul ar deeper level to understand its importance
   of it and then discuss the spirit in detail.

What Is a Soul as Defined by the Bible?

   Let's see what the Bible has to say about the soul as we analyze the
   verses of Scripture.

   Matthew 10:28: "And do not fear those who kill the body but cannot kill
   the soul. Rather fear him who can destroy both soul and body in hell."

   No man can kill our soul. Although they can kill our bodies, they
   cannot do anything personally to affect our souls.

   Ezekiel 18:4: "Behold, all souls are mine; the soul of the father as
   well as the soul of the son is mine: the soul who sins shall die."

   Souls belong to the Lord. He created them when he created us. This
   verse also mentions that any soul that sins will experience death.
   Considering every human, except Jesus, had sinned, everyone has earned
   eternal death. Thankfully, God has offered a way of salvation for those
   whose souls are doomed to die.

   Matthew 16:26: "For what will it profit a man if he gains the whole
   world and forfeits his soul? Or what shall a man give in return for his
   soul?"

   We cannot allow ourselves to get distracted by the things of this
   earth. Our soul, after all, cannot take its possessions on earth with
   it to the afterlife. It would be folly to strive to gain the whole
   world on account of losing one's soul. One soul's destination is of
   utmost importance and should be the number one priority in a person's
   life.

Role and Functions of the Soul

   The soul is basically our mind, our emotions, and our will. It is who
   we are as human beings. But it is also used to express God. As written
   in Luke 1:46-47, Mary’s Song, “And Mary said: My soul glorifies the
   Lord and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior.”

   In this verse, we can see that Mary uses her soul to glorify God and
   then uses her spirit to rejoice in what God has done to save her.
   Glorifying God is human behavior and human responsibility. We express
   our humanity to God through our souls and magnify His power and
   presence through our souls.

   Although we express God’s magnanimity in our souls, we can never
   express God’s power through our soul because it is our humanity. We can
   do good works and be godly and still fall short. We can never express
   God’s love for us through our soul alone. We then need the spirit to
   express God’s love.

--
   love is through our spirit.

   While the soul is the source of our expression through our humanity, it
   has its limitations and the only way we can experience God is through
   our spirit. The soul is merely a channel.

   Let us go back to our imagery of the parts. The body is the outer
   level, followed by the soul and the spirit is the core. The expression
   of love to God paved the way through the soul. We first magnify God’s
   power and grace, and then we express and experience it fully through
   our spirit.
--

   This verse demands us to walk with our spirit, which means living a
   life according to the spirit and not our soul. The way of the spirit is
   the way of God. The spirit came to us through Jesus Christ. He lived
   amongst us and became human; for this reason, he has given us the gift
   of connecting with God through our spirit.

   In conclusion, understanding the distinctions between the body, soul,
   and spirit is vital for deepening our relationship with God. The Bible
   reveals that while the body interacts with the physical world, the soul
   reflects our humanity—our thoughts, emotions, and will. The spirit,
   however, is the innermost part of us, designed to connect with God in a
--
   actions or human emotions but about living a Spirit-led life that
   glorifies God in all we do. The Apostle Paul’s words in Romans 8:4
   challenge us to move beyond the limitations of the flesh and soul,
   walking instead in the Spirit. This walk begins when we place our faith
   in Jesus Christ, who not only redeems our souls but also empowers our
   spirits to live in communion with God.

   As we grow in our understanding of these truths, let us strive to
   magnify God with our souls and rejoice in Him with our spirits, living
   a life that reflects His love, grace, and purpose.

--
   Other Sources:

   Soul Definition and Meaning

   Photo Credit: ©iStock/Getty Images Plus/Everste
