   #ChiefExecutive.net » Feed ChiefExecutive.net » Comments Feed
   ChiefExecutive.net » Job One: Protect The Soul Of The Business Comments
   Feed oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML) JSON

--
   (BUTTON) Search

Job One: Protect The Soul Of The Business

     * April 8, 2025
--
   The founder of a $600 million construction company recently called me,
   frustrated with the younger leaders he was bringing up in the business
   to take over for him. “Okay, so what is the soul of your business?” I
   asked.

--
   Most of those chiming in missed something crucial: Founder Mode isn’t
   about micromanaging for its own sake. It is about remaining focused on
   the business’ soul. As Tom Peters famously said, you can outsource
   everything but a company’s soul. I would argue you can delegate
   everything but the soul.

   It’s the founder’s job to be hands-on with the soul of the business.
   You are allowed to be a maniacal micromanager—and even be an a-hole if
   needed—because you cannot let the soul slip away.

Protecting the Soul

   To protect the company’s soul, you need to identify what drove its
   success and remain dedicated to it until someone equally committed can
   take over.

   Steve Jobs understood this. He fixated on design at Apple because that
   was the company’s soul, lunching daily with former design chief Jony
   Ive to keep this front and center. Ive maintained that focus after Jobs
   passed away, but after Ive left in 2021, innovation stagnated.

Living the Soul

   Randy Amon, founder of ABL Electronics (later sold to APC), emphasized
   his focus on the customer experience (the company’s soul) by handing
   out business cards reading “Head of Customer Service” with “Owner”
   underneath it. His obsession with getting that aspect of his business
--
   injecting his obsession into this behemoth organization.

   A key to keeping the soul alive is having team members experience it
   firsthand. Aflac requires every employee to file a claim to better
   understand that customer experience. Ritz-Carlton’s Horst Schulze had
--
   “ladies and gentlemen” (customers) they served.

When the Soul Dies

   Acquirers purchasing valuable firms often inadvertently strip away a
   company’s soul in the push for efficiency, ultimately destroying value
   along the way. One founder who perfected the integration of
   acquisitions through an intense focus on the employee experience saw
--
   later sold the division for a fraction of what they paid.

   The bottom line is that the soul matters—design, the customer
   experience, the algorithm, on-time delivery, etc.—and the founder’s job
   is to keep it alive. Too much is at stake to let a company lose its
   soul.
   Picture of Verne Harnish

