   #The Vector Impact » 5 Signs You’ve Sold Your Soul To Work for Your
   Company Comments Feed oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML) JSON

--
   Request Interview

5 Signs You’ve Sold Your Soul To Work for Your Company

     * Liam Carnahan
--
   because you feel you owe your company something?

   These are just some of the signs you’ve sold your soul to work for your
   current company.

--

   I’m now working for myself and living as a digital nomad, which is much
   more fulfilling for my soul (and my bank account, believe it or not).

   The first step to get out of a soul-sucking job is acknowledging the
   signs that you’re selling your soul.

   Then, you can make a plan to land a role that brings you joy and makes
   you feel a sense of belonging. We’ll cover all that in this article.

Why selling your soul feels more common than ever

   When I first wrote this article a few years ago, the workplace looked
--

   Workers today face a unique set of pressures that make it even harder
   than ever to avoid selling your soul to a company. It’s particularly
   difficult for GenZ workers, who are just now entering a rapidly
   shifting playing field, where entire industries are being upended by
--
   minimum to avoid getting fired while mentally checking out.

   From where I sit, quiet quitting is just another form of soul-selling.
   You’re still trading your time and energy for a paycheck at a job that
   doesn’t fulfill you. You’re just doing it with less enthusiasm.
--
   The pressure to stay in unfulfilling jobs has never been higher, which
   is exactly why recognizing the signs becomes so important. Let’s look
   at what it actually means to sell your soul, and how to tell if you’re
   doing it.

What does it mean to sell your soul?

   Selling your soul means you are giving up your morals, dreams, or goals
   for some other sort of reward. In this article, we’re mostly talking
   about people who have made a personal sacrifice for job security or a
   steady paycheck.

   The concept of selling your soul dates back centuries, when a few
   different cultures developed stories about people who literally sold
   their soul to the devil.

   Perhaps the most famous is the legend of Doctor Faustus, a play based
   on an alchemist and necromancer from the 1500s, in which the doctor
   sells his soul to a demon named Mephistopheles, in return for sacred
   knowledge.

--
   even though they hate their boss or the work they do.

Selling your soul vs. making a temporary sacrifice: How to know the
difference

--
   fulfilling life outside of work, or both.

   The difference between a temporary sacrifice and selling your soul
   comes down to three key factors: timeline, trajectory, and boundaries.

--
   You’re still moving toward your larger goals, just taking a detour.

   Selling your soul, on the other hand, happens when you stop making
   progress toward what you actually want. You’re treading water instead
   of swimming toward shore. The job isn’t teaching you anything useful,
--
   you’ve crossed into dangerous territory.

5 signs you’ve sold your soul to your company

   As you read the sections below, ask yourself, “Does this sound like
--
   And no matter how tired you are of this job, you just can’t leave.

   If that sounds familiar, you may be selling your soul to your company.

   Let’s look at some of the biggest warning signs that indicate that
--
2. You’ve compromised your morals and beliefs

   This is probably the most obvious sign you’ve sold your soul to your
   company: when you’re willing to do anything for the job, even if it
   goes against your own values and morals.
--
   While I don’t oppose the concept of pornography outright, this site
   felt problematically sexist and degrading. But because I’d already sold
   my soul and wanted to keep my job, I agreed. *Cringe.*

   In a situation like this, you don’t set out to compromise your morals.
--
3. You have no life outside of the job

   You may be selling your soul to your company if you’ve given up your
   personal life to spend more time at your job.

--
4. You’re experiencing serious job burnout

   Job burnout on its own is not a sign that you’ve sold your soul to your
   company. In fact, it’s alarmingly common.

--

   These kinds of behaviors can lead to burnout that’s directly caused by
   making compromises, or “selling your soul.”

   It’s not always easy to identify workplace burnout as it’s happening.
--
   Why?

   Because I’d sold my soul to my job.

   Most of my waking hours were spent at work, and when I got home, I was
--
   turn on my computer and do more writing.

   Our passions are what make up our souls.

   Being creative with words is what brings me happiness and fulfillment.
--
   getting in the way.

The true cost of selling your soul

   The most dangerous part about selling your soul to your company is how
   gradually it happens. You don’t wake up one morning and decide to
   sacrifice your values and dreams for a paycheck. Instead, it’s a slow
--
   good fit.

How can I avoid selling my soul?

   You have to put in the effort to find work that feels effortless.
--

   So, if you’re in a job right now where you feel forced to sell your
   soul, here are some steps you can take to get out.


--
   no simple task.

   Remember that it’s fine if your day job isn’t the most soul-satisfying
   thing in the world. Plenty of people work at jobs that aren’t 100%
   within their “passion profile.”

   The key is to find a job that leaves you with enough time, energy, and
   resources to pursue the things that do feed your soul when you’re not
   on the clock.

--
   and get creative with your work.

   And you’ll never have to worry about selling your soul to your company
   when you work for yourself.

--
       6 months ago
       This is a powerful and necessary read. The metaphor of “selling
       your soul” cuts right to the heart of the compromises we make in
       the pursuit of success, validation, or simply stability in a
       demanding professional world. You’ve articulated a tension that
