   About (BUTTON) Shop (BUTTON) Donate

   www.catholic.com/qa/difference-between-human-soul-and-spirit-2nd-use
   [AdobeStock_2889526-2-1-1200x400.jpeg]

   Q&A

Difference Between Human Soul and Spirit?

   [image001-3-150x150.jpg?_cb=2025-10-15T14:10:02]
--
Question:

   Does the Church distinguish between one's soul and one's spirit? I've
   heard attempts to distinguish them but don't get it.

Answer:

   While we can make distinctions between “soul” and “spirit” as St. Paul
   writes in 1 Thessalonians 5:23, they are fundamentally the same in man
   (CCC 367). That is, as the Church teaches, the “soul signifies the
   spiritual principle of man. . . . The human body is human precisely
   because it is animated by a spiritual soul” (CCC 363-364).

   A soul, on its most basic level, is the “life principle” or “animating
   principle” of a body. In other words, all living bodies have a soul. If
   they did not have souls, they would not be alive. While plants,
   animals, and anything living contains a soul, the human soul is unique.
   In man, the soul has not only vegetative powers (as plants have) and
   sensitive powers (as animals have) but also rational powers, which
   makes it akin to pure spirits in that sense. It is this rational power
--
   Consequently, we say that a human is unique among living beings because
   a human is a created, immortal spirit united to and animating a body.
   In other words, man is the only bodily being whose soul is a spirit
   (animals are not spiritual), and the only spirit which is a soul
   (angels do not have a body and therefore no soul). Only in humans do we
   find both soul and spirit. Indeed, man is a union or composite of body
   and soul. As Vatican II reminds us, “the human person, though made of
   body and soul, is a unity. In itself, in its very bodily condition, it
   synthesizes the elements of the material world, which through it are
   thus brought to their highest perfection” (Gaudium et Spes 14)

   “Soul” when distinguished from “spirit” means that which gives life to
   a body. “Spirit” when contrasted with “soul” simply means those aspects
   of human life and activity that transcend our bodily limitations and so
   open the soul toward the supernatural life of grace. As the Church
   adds, “‘Spirit’ signifies that from creation man is ordered to a
   supernatural end and that his soul can be raised beyond all it deserves
   to communion with God” (no. 367).

