   #Katrina Kenison » Feed Katrina Kenison » Comments Feed Katrina Kenison
   » soul work Comments Feed oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML) JSON

     * home
--
   celebrating the gift of each ordinary day

     * Soul Work
     * Parenting
     * Writing & Reading
     * Hearth & Home

   Home » soul work

soul work

   You know how it is. The dishes need washing, the houseplants are
--
   complete.

   And yet, this, I’m pretty sure, is where soul work actually begins –
   right here, right now, in the midst of the mess.

--
   147575

   Soul work is about finding the sacred in the everyday stuff of life,
   about bringing spirituality home to roost in the nooks and crannies of
   ordinary days spent doing ordinary things. It is about trusting that
--
   was in itself a demanding spiritual practice. My first book, Mitten
   Strings for God, grew out of the challenge I set myself: to clear some
   quiet space in which our souls could grow. (Over a hundred thousand
   copies and nine translations later, it’s clear I wasn’t the only one
   seeking to restore quality and stillness to overcrowded days and lives
--
   The journey home is ongoing, a universal pilgrimage — as I discovered
   while writing my most recent memoir, Magical Journey, which brought me
   face to face with the most demanding soul work of all: letting go of
   the need to improve ourselves and relaxing, instead, into the wonder of
   who we already are.
--
   working in harmony with things as they are. Click on the phrases below
   to read related posts, pieces I think of as bulletins from the road.
   (My complete archive of Soul Work posts is here.)


--
   language you don’t know and speak them with all your heart. Life is
   short.
   "Easter is the soul's first taste of spring." — Ri "Easter is the
   soul's first taste of spring." — Richelle E. Goodrich "Easter is the
   soul's first taste of spring." — Richelle E. Goodrich
   The Way to Start a Day The way to start a day is t The Way to Start a
   Day The way to start a day is this: Go outside and face the east and
