   (BUTTON) Tune In
   🎵 WIn5D
   Pure 432Hz and 528Hz music for the awakened soul
   ... LISTENING NOW
   In5D LIVE Talk
--
   (BUTTON) ⏸

How Do You Connect To Your Soul Group/Family?

   By In5D on May 29, 2018 in Spiritual Awakening
--

   The answers may come from automatic writing, meditation, intuition,
   higher self, guides, channeled, or from soul group.

How do you connect to your soul group/family?

   Heather

   “The ideology that you are separate from your soul group or family is
   more of a 3d barrier than anything. At any point, we can reach out
   energetically and connect with our soul families. The best way to bring
   them into your physical reality is by being true to your soul. The more
   in line you are with yourself and your higher self the frequency you
   radiate at will change, drawing your soul family near. As soul families
   are groups of souls with similar energy frequencies and existences, we
   all have an almost magnetic like pull towards one another. As one
   member of this family puts in the work to raise and strengthen their
--
   same. The universe, itself, notices these frequencies raising and
   reaching out for their counterparts, so it essentially puts into place
   arrangements for the physical embodiments of these souls to link up.” –
   Sekhmet

--
   Meashenu

   First, I’d like to share how I view a soul group/family. For me, my
   soul family is the group of beings I came into existence with when my
   soul was originally created and formed a group/family together. There
   are 13 members in my soul group total, from what I have been able to
   look into so far.

   The other part of how I view my soul group is first by understanding
   Source. Through Source, all of us are connected. We are all part of the
   same cloud of energy, as an example. We are all one. We are each
--
   identities/energy signatures, but are always a part of that cloud and
   connected to it. So, using the same type of example, I really see my
   soul group and other groups as smaller clouds within that big cloud.
   With a soul group, what one member experiences every other member
   experiences. The memories & information are shared within the group. I
   like to view this as a bunch of computers networked together where
--
   Those of us currently incarnated on the planet, all of our experiences,
   thoughts, feelings, and memories of this time on the planet are all
   shared with the soul group. When they access this, it would be like
   they are the ones incarnated and having the experience. That is why so
   many various soul groups of beings wanted to get at least one member of
   their group incarnated at this time of the ascension. The groups wanted
   to be able to have that experience.

   The main way that I connect to my soul group is through my heart space.
   When I go into my heart space, I set my intention that I’d like to
   reach out to my soul group and then find a space in there that I
   dedicate to connecting to my group. This could be some temple, a room,
   crystal garden, or anything. Once there, I start connecting to my group
   with intention, but also make sure that I do this through my own soul
   energy. Since my energy is one with the group, I’ve found if I put my
   attention on my own soul energy/signature then connect with that energy
   to the group, it works really well. This also helps tremendously with
   not having any interference for me. I generally view my connection like
--
   way your group can connect to you the best they will. Just like
   building and figuring out a connection to the higher self and guides,
   the soul group is the same. It may take some practice and eventually
   over time you will have an experience and either see them, feel them,
   or just know that they helped you and they are around.

   Another method is put intention on connecting to your soul group.
   Again, I’d recommend going through your own soul/higher self energy to
   do this. Once you feel you have connected to them, you can then
   visualize/feel/put intention that the energy of your soul group come
   down through your auric field, into your crown chakra, and down through
   your chakras until you get to the solar plexus chakra. From the solar
--
   something else for you!

   One issue I’ve had with connecting to my soul group was not allowing
   the connection to happen. Sometimes, it’s simply about allowing and
   receiving the incoming information from them. The example or image I
   came to understand this as, is imagine having two hand held
   radios/walkie talkies, one representing myself, and the other the soul
   group. Once the walkie talkies were both tuned to the same channel,
   they were connected. But then I was trying so hard to talk to them from
--

   Another good practice you can do is send love or other positive
   feelings, like joy, through your higher self to your soul group. Then,
   ask that they send love back to you to your heart space. This is a good
   practice and a good way to really feel the love from them, so you know
--


   Enjoyed this article? Join thousands of conscious souls and get the
   latest updates from In5D, In5D Radio and WIn5D delivered straight to
   your inbox!
--
   GreggPrescott.com

   Tags: How Do You Connect To Your Soul Group/Family?

Subscribe
--
   Stay connected with In5D! Get the latest articles, updates on In5D
   Radio and WIn5D delivered straight to your inbox. Join thousands of
   conscious souls!
   Name ____________________
   Email ____________________
