   #Human character - the I and threefold soul Free Man Creator (en) Free
   Man Creator Atom feed

--
   (Go)

Human character - the I and threefold soul

   From Free Man Creator
--
   (SoF) that let their substance ripple in and take hold of Man's astral,
   etheric and physical bodies. These faculties are called respectively
   the sentient, intellectual and consciousness soul, together making up
   the threefold soul. Man's individual spiritual I uses these lower
   bodies, and - as part of the development of humanity across the ages -
   grows into using the available faculties: starting with the sentient
   soul .. upto the consciousness soul. This aspect depends on:
     * the maturity of the soul, as related to when the individual started
       incarnating, see Planets hosting beings at various stages of
       evolution
     * the soul's individual pathway of developing through incarnate
       experiences, and how successful it has been in accomplishing the
       target for each age, or partially or fully falling sideways in
--

   The natural development of the I is one of growth from the sentient
   soul experience growing into intellectual and later consciousness soul.
   Thereby the human 'I' uses an always larger part of Man's lower
   structure as a means to function and express. This is represented on
   Schema FMC00.431 by the arrows to the right. The consciousness soul is
   pivotal as it brings fructification from the spiritual world and moral
   impulses that are brought down also to the intellectual and sentient
   souls. As a result, Man's human character is undergoes transformation
   as the I matures in the mastery and use of the threefold soul.

   It is important to realize Man does not leave behind the one aspect for
   the other, but gains in spiritual maturity: the mastery of having grown
   into the intellectual soul changes the sentient soul, and similarly the
   consciousness soul fructifies and changes the intellectual and sentient
   souls.

   Hence, the human 'I' is really alive in the three lower bodily
   principles or members of Man all the time, and these three aspects are
   called the threefold soul. How the I holds the middle (or can be seen
   in the workings) of the threefold soul is also described in the
   lectures referenced on Schema FMC00.428A (below). Note the
   consciousness soul, intellectual soul and sentient soul should not be
   completely equated with willing, thinking and feeling, for the latter
   are to be found in each of the three soul members
   [ ]

--
     * 1 Lexicon terms
     * 2 Aspects
          + 2.1 the threefold soul
               o 2.1.1 consciousness soul
          + 2.2 human character
          + 2.3 soul life
          + 2.4 various
     * 3 Inspirational quote
--
               o 5.2.18 1917-10-08-GA177
          + 5.3 Laocoön and Niobe groups
          + 5.4 consciousness soul
               o 5.4.1 1916-10-10-GA168
               o 5.4.2 1918-12-28-GA187
--
               o 6.1.1 Note from a reader (computer translation from DE)
                 2024-03
          + 6.2 Note 2 - On the consciousness soul
               o 6.2.1 1 - Introduction
               o 6.2.2 2 - Study approach with the FMC Schemas
--
                    # 6.2.3.8 Extra notes
               o 6.2.4 3 - The pivotal importance of the consciousness
                 soul
                    # 6.2.4.1 More
                    # 6.2.4.2 Addition
--

     * human character
     * sentient soul
     * intellectual soul
     * threefold soul
     * consciousness soul
     * Laocoön group (or Laokoon or Laocoon)
     * Niobe group (or Florentine Niobids)
--
Aspects

the threefold soul

     * the Human ‘I’ encloses within itself the sentient, the intellectual
       and consciousness souls (1910-06-09-GA121, see also Schema
       FMC00.428A)
     * consist of three modifications, three parts within the astral body
--
       transformation of the astral body itself, of the etheric body and
       of the physical body. But these transformations are still not what
       meets us as the actual human inner being or soul. The soul, the
       inner part of Man, the three modifications of the astral body must
       make use of certain instruments, and these express themselves in
       such a way, that in the astral body the sentient soul is a sort of
       instrument, in the etheric body the intellectual soul soul, and in
       the physical body the consciousness soul (1910-06-09-GA121)
     * the threefold soul and the Mars, Mercury and Jupiter influences
          + Mars <-> sentient soul (<-> sound ether); Mercury <->
            intellectual soul (<-> light ether); Jupiter <-> consciousness
            soul (<-> electrical forces) (1905-09-02-GA091 and Note Nr.
            6821 published in GA091 p 330)
          + see also 1908-02-15-GA102 and 1906-01-07-GA262 on Earth's
            seven epochs#Mars and Mercury influences 3)
     * the archangel does not 'see' the human sentient soul or the part of
       the intellectual soul concerned with external sensory perception,
       only the part of the intellectual soul and consciousness soul with
       purely sense-free thinking, art, moral ideals etc.
       (1910-06-09-GA121, see also Third Hierarchy)
     * threefold soul and Christ impulse
          + for further explanation on Schemas FMC00.428 and FMC00.428A,
            see Thinking Feeling Willing#1917-10-08-GA177 and Schema
            FMC00.488 on that same topic page.

consciousness soul

     * “The consciousness soul is that part of the soul through which the
       soul comes to a consciousness of the spiritual world." (1904-GA009,
       Ch 2)
          + the best way to get into an imagination is the row below on
            Schema FMC00.431 that depicts the influx of the spiritual from
            the right to the left, illustrating how moral ideals come from
            from the spiritual world through the consciousness soul and
            influence 'down' the intellectual and sentient soul and work
            in the lower bodies of Man.
          + As a metaphoric image, imagine osmosis or the movement of a
--
          + this is also why Rudolf Steiner expands on the term 'moral
            imagination'; see Moral ideals#moral imagination
     * "in the consciousness-soul, the actual I-soul, is integrated the
       spirit-self or manas .. the spirit self (or manas) is enclosed in
       the consciousness soul" (1907-12-27-GA101)
     * as key to becoming a spiritual being
          + as the consciousness soul is the principle in which the
            spirit-self develops, this principle is called the 'mother of
            Christ', or also the 'Virgin Sophia'. The spirit-self is born
            from within ... out of the consciousness soul. Hence the
            principle giving birth to Man's higher triad or the 'mother'
            of such spiritualized human being is not a physical bodily
            mother, but she lies within him and is the purified and
            spiritualized consciousness soul. (1907-11-20-GA100; see also
            Mary#1907-11-20-GA100)
          + The consciousness soul gives birth to the true spiritual human
            'I', from the astral world to the spirit world. See also left
            and right on Schema FMC00.508 regarding the Interpenetration
--
            on Schema FMC00.261, connecting to layer 3 of the lower spirit
            world Schema FMC00.136
     * “Only in the age of the consciousness soul, does the possibility
       arise for evil to be taken up in the human soul itself."
       (1918-10-27-GA185)
     * The development of the consciousness soul demands liberty of
       thought; and this can flourish only in a certain atmosphere. In the
       future this will become increasingly challenging due to pressures
--
       869#1916-10-10-GA168)
     * interactions with others
          + The consciousness soul can only develop when our contacts with
            other people are made from within ... when less importance is
            attached to what takes place at present between one person and
--

     * The etheric body is the bearer of a man's habits and the bearer of
       memory and the temperament, of the permanent qualities of soul in a
       human being (1906-10-15-GA096; see Karma or
       destiny#1906-10-15-GA096)
     * physiognomy as the physical expression of human character
       (1910-03-12-GA068B and 1910-03-14-GA058)
     * link between soul disposition or state of the soul (gemüt) and
       temperament (1908-10-26-GA244 Q&A 172.1 and 1911-11-09-GA244 Q&A
       218.3), see also Human temperaments
--
       1917-01-24-GA292) - and Lessing's views
          + symbol of human character, or the unbalance between the three
            elements of the soul
               o Laocoon shows, in an outward physical way, the definite
                 moment when the human being loses the unified character
--
                 (1922-03-31-GA211)

soul life

     * desire and judgement - two main elements in soul life, and what
       takes place in the process of human sense perception and the
       creation of mental images, sensations and memory (see Schema
--
various

     * "the threefold character [of the soul] and its connection with the
       cosmos cannot be expressed more significantly than it has been
       expressed in 'Kalevala' "(1914-11-09-GA158)
--
   1909-10-29-GA068B

     The I 'plays on the instrument of the soul and the different strings
     of human soul life',  what comes out as music and the expression of
     individual soul life, is what we know as and call human character

   1918-10-19-GA185 see: Reconquista#1918-10-19-GA185 and Current fifth
   cultural age#Inspirational quotes

     The age of the consciousness soul demands that Man should stand on
     his own feet, be self-sufficient and, as personality, emancipate
     himself. He must abandon the old supports. He can no longer allow
--

   Schema FMC00.431: provides and overview on how the human 'I' "plays on
   the instrument of the soul and the different strings of human soul
   life", what comes out as music and the expression of individual soul
   life, is what we know as and call human character.
     * how the I pulses through, works on, and develops the human soul
     * the human I works itself 'up' sentient -> intellectual ->
       consciousness soul, and can express itself in each of the three
       areas of soul life
     * the I works order & harmony in the soul life, so a mutual
       fructification of sentient, intellectual, consciousness soul
       components

--
   contents from the other five lectures listed.

   Important for the understanding of the consciousness soul is the last
   row, and the influx of the spiritual from the right to the left,
   illustrating how moral ideals come from from the spiritual world
   through the consciousness soul and influence 'down' the intellectual
   and sentient soul and work in the lower bodies of Man.

   As a metaphoric image, imagine osmosis or the movement of a less
--
   Christos, budhi or life-spirit cosmic principle (re Schema FMC00.481)

   With the development of the consciousness soul, and leading into the
   next sixth cultural age of the spirit-self, comes the the gradual
   development of community and selfless love .. "a few thousand years
   from now, there will be unpleasant soul-conditions aroused when a Man
   wishes as an individual to have any sort of happiness in the world
   without its being shared by others. This interdependence of mankind is
   inherent in human evolution ... This is simply the direction in which
   the human soul is developing." (1918-12-28-GA187)
   provides and overview on how the human 'I' "plays on the instrument of
   the soul and the different strings of human soul life", what comes out
   as music and the expression of individual soul life, is what we know as
   and call human character. * how the I pulses through, works on, and
   develops the human soul * the human I works itself 'up' sentient ->
   intellectual ->  consciousness soul, and can express itself in each of
   the three areas of soul life * the I works order & harmony in the soul
   life, so a mutual fructification of sentient, intellectual,
   consciousness soul components . Note: this schema was assembled as a
   foundation mainly on the basis of the original German lecture versions
   of 1909-10-29-GA068B and 1910-03-12-GA068B, it can most probably be
   enriched by including contents from the other five lectures listed.
   Important for the understanding of the consciousness soul is the last
   row, and the influx of the spiritual from the right to the left,
   illustrating how moral ideals come from from the spiritual world
   through the consciousness soul and influence 'down' the intellectual
   and sentient soul and work in the lower bodies of Man. As a metaphoric
   image, imagine osmosis or the movement of a less concentrated solvent
   through a semipermeable membrane to another more concentrated solvent.
--
   similarly the rippling and pushing through of the higher Christos,
   budhi or life-spirit cosmic principle (re Schema FMC00.481) With the
   development of the consciousness soul, and leading into the next sixth
   cultural age of the spirit-self, comes the the gradual development of
   community and selfless love .. "a few thousand years from now, there
   will be unpleasant soul-conditions aroused when a Man wishes as an
   individual to have any sort of happiness in the world without its being
   shared by others. This interdependence of mankind is inherent in human
   evolution ... This is simply the direction in which the human soul is
   developing." (1918-12-28-GA187)

--

   Schema FMC00.565: shows a simple schematic to the description the two
   main elements in soul life, and what takes place in the process of
   human sense perception and the creation of mental images, sensations
   and memory - as related to desire and judgement.
   shows a simple schematic to the description the two main elements in
   soul life, and what takes place in the process of human sense
   perception and the creation of mental images, sensations and memory -
   as related to desire and judgement.
--
   Jehovah SoF impulse infused love into Man's physical blood from below,
   the Luciferic influence brought Man's freedom and egoism from above,
   into Man's astral body and developing sentient soul. Both influences
   were first subconscious, and develop to full consciousness only with
   the maturing of Man's threefold soul. The Christ Impulse brought about
   a shift, see Schema FMC00.428A.
   [1100px-FMC00.428.jpg]
--
   fructification of Man by the Christ Impulse (from 1910-09-11-GA123)

   Specifically, how the evolved consciousness soul is the gateway for
   this spiritual fructification by Man's higher triad (consisting of
   spirit-self or manas, life-spirit or budhi, and spirit-man or atma)
--
   provides the key statement and illustration of the fructification of
   Man by the Christ Impulse (from 1910-09-11-GA123) Specifically, how the
   evolved consciousness soul is the gateway for this spiritual
   fructification by Man's higher triad (consisting of spirit-self or
   manas, life-spirit or budhi, and spirit-man or atma) through the Christ
--

   Schema FMC00.677: provides a synthetic overview of the planetary
   influences on the development of the human threefold soul, and
   specifically the Mars and Mercury influences of iron and mercury of in
   the Lemurian and Atlantean epochs.
--
   topic pages Human 'I' and Development of the I
   provides a synthetic overview of the planetary influences on the
   development of the human threefold soul, and specifically the Mars and
   Mercury influences of iron and mercury of in the Lemurian and Atlantean
   epochs. See also Schema FMC00.219 and Schema FMC00.451, and the
--
   Schema FMC00.085 is a simple summary table capturing key figures
   appearing in the Kalevela, the story of the development of the sentient
   soul. (first draft, to be extended)
   [900px-FMC00.085.jpg]

--
   Below are seven main lectures part of 1909-GA058 and GA068B.
     * GA058 volume was first published in 1984, with the title:
       Metamorphoses of the soul, paths of soul experience. Interestingly,
       the lectures in that volume first have 1909-12-05-GA058 (anger: the
       chained Prometheus), then 1909-10-22-GA058 (truth, and Goethe's
--
   shows.

   Note that in 1910-GA059, Vol 2 of Metamorphoses of the soul, Rudolf
   Steiner goes into characteristics such as conscience, laughing and
   crying, human error, praying, positive and negative soul disposition,
   and so on.

--
     Moral goodness is independent of inclinations and passions, inasmuch
     as it does not allow itself to be commanded by, but commands them.
     Likes and dislikes, desire and loathing belong to the personal soul
     of man. Duty stands higher than likes and dislikes. Duty may stand
     so high in the eyes of a Man that he will sacrifice his life for its
--

     Moral goodness has, like truth, its eternal value in itself, and
     does not receive it from the sentient soul. By causing the
     self-existent true and good to come to life in his inner being, Man
     raises himself above the mere sentient soul. The eternal spirit
     shines into it. A light is kindled in it which is imperishable. In
     so far as the soul lives in this light, it is a participant of the
     eternal. It unites therewith its own existence. What the soul
     carries within itself of the true and the good is immortal in it.

     Let us call that which shines forth in the soul as eternal the
     consciousness-soul.

   and

     The consciousness-soul is in touch with the self-existent truth
     which is independent of all antipathy and sympathy; the spirit-self
     bears within it the same truth, but taken up into and enclosed by
--
     [and]
     * What becomes of the astral body when it has absorbed the Martian
       forces, we call the sentient soul;
     * when it has absorbed the Mercury forces: the intellectual soul,
     * and the move to Jupiter: consciousness soul.

     Now a great change has taken place with the astral body. This
--

     [so]
     * Sonic forces <-> Mars Forces <-> sentient soul
     * Light forces <-> Mercury forces <-> intellectual soul
     * Electric forces <-> Jupiter forces <-> consciousness soul

1907-03-16-GA097
--
   the below can be read/interpreted in the context of understanding
   dementia and diseases such as alzheimer (see Memory), but also more
   general the fact that certain soul faculties (may) weaken in old people
   (eg slower functioning etc)

--
   1907

     Why do old people grow weak-minded, seeing that the soul remains
     changed?

     The soul does not change. It never descends from the level it has
     reached, it its instrument has grown weak. It is like a great
     pianist who cannot play well as before if the instrument is poor.

     You will say the soul no longer knows its own level. Yes, for it
     cannot see itself for as long as it is in a physical body. There you
     altogether have only the reflection of the soul, the mirror
     reflection. When the mirror grows or breaks, it can no longer give a
     reflection.

     It is only the occult student who is truly able to perceive his
     soul.

   quote - other version

     The soul, indeed, does not change. It never descends from the stage
     once reached. But its instrument has become weak, like a great
     pianist who can no longer play as he played formerly, if he has a
     bad instrument.

     You will say the soul no longer knows its own stage. Yes, the soul
     does not see itself as long as it is in a physical body. There is
     only to be found the reflection of the soul, the mirror image. Now
     the mirror becomes clouded or broken. Then it can no longer reflect.

1907-12-27-GA101

   for specific quote on consciousness soul, see: Man's bodily
   principles#1907-12-27-GA101

   for full lecture, see: Group souls of humanity#1907-12-27-GA101

1908-10-19-GA107

   on the soul-life - life in the astral world

     We live in our soul-life in the most manifold feelings, perceptions,
     ideas, concepts, and impulses of will. These all take their course
     in our soul-life from morning to evening. If we observe man
     superficially, this soul-life appears to us to be something
     self-contained, enclosed in itself, and this view is justifiable.
     Observe how your life flows along with the first thoughts formed in
--

     When we have some kind of feeling, when joy or terror flashes
     through our soul, that, to begin with, is an event in our soul-life,
     but it is not merely that. If someone can test that clairvoyantly,
     it will be seen that something goes out of the soul like a current,
     like a shining current, which goes into the astral world. It does
     not go in casually, however, and without direction, but it takes its
     way to a being of the astral world.

     Let us suppose a thought arises in our soul; let us say we ponder on
     the nature of a table. Inasmuch as the thought shimmers through our
     soul, the clairvoyant can observe how a current proceeds from this
     thought to a being of the astral world. And so it is for every
     thought, every concept, every feeling. From the whole stream that
     flows away before the soul, currents continually go towards the most
     diverse beings of the astral world.

--
     principles?

     Mainly in the consciousness soul .. [Vorzüglich] the 'I'.

     ...

     The German word for the active force in the soul is 'Mut'. When an
     attribute or characteristic becomes intrinsic, then this is
     represented with the syllable 'Ge' .. so 'Gemuot' is the same as
     'Gemüt'. The German word 'Gemüt' as an encompassing concept. .. The
     I develops in the consciousness soul. .. Through the consciousness
     the active element of the feeling comes in: Muot or Mut, the active
     that works in the soul.

     'Gemüet, Gemüot' .. means 'Gemüt' .. is the part of the soul that
     develops itself from intellectual soul, consciousness soul, where
     the Willing impuls hits in.

--

     When someone is born, his I and astral body, including his sentient
     soul, intellectual soul and consciousness soul, are by no means
     featureless; they are endowed with definite attributes and
     characteristics brought from previous lives.
--

   Gestures of reverence are the bended knee, folded hands, the lifted
   face. The soul purifies within itself a feeling for what is beautiful
   and what is good. The will, purified by reverence, builds up moral
   ideals. In old age the strength arises to be active in life. We draw
   near to the almighty, Increasingly rich knowledge is the result of
   educating the consciousness soul. The “eternal-masculine” must permeate
   all reverence. The strong Iascends to higher regions.

--
   synopsis:

   There are hidden faculties in the soul. Soul and spirit can issue only
   from soul and spirit. The fact of repeated earth lives is a consequence
   of this. The sentient soul is connected with the sentient body, the
   Intellectual soul with the ether body and the consciousness soul with
   the physical body. In the sentient soul lie images, antipathy and
   sympathy. The intellectual soul forms thoughts and judgements with the
   outside world. We have to make ourselves as many-sided as possible and
   overcome egoism. Anger can educate the human being to calmness and true
--
   The divisions in the being of Man must be overcome by the unified
   character. At its foundation lies the harmony brought forth by the I
   from the interaction of the three soul members. The human being ripens
   through experience and wisdom learnt from life. Experiences are
   transformed into abilities. They are limited by the disposition of the
--
   ripeness of experience is not attained until the 35th year of age. Joy
   and love fill the physical body of the child with strength. Then there
   are fewer obstacles for the I in the period of the consciousness soul.
   Similar links exist between the ether body and the intellectual soul
   and the periods when they manifest themselves. The experience of
   authority in the period from 7 to 14 provides the foundation for
   courage. The ideals presented to the human being in the period from 14
   to 21 are imprinted on the sentient soul. Immersion in the cosmic
   secrets further remoulds the character.

--
1910-06-09-GA121

   see long extract on: Folk souls#1910-06-09-GA121 - advised to read in
   full

--
     find it necessary to picture it as being threefold, as being divided
     into:
     * The sentient soul, which is, as it were, the lowest member of the
       inner human being,
     * The intellectual soul, the central member, and
     * The consciousness (or spiritual) soul, the highest member of the
       inner nature of the human being, in which the human ‘ I ’ is first
       actually brought to a state of consciousness.

     In the spiritual-soul is first to be found that which is called
     human self-consciousness. Nevertheless the ‘ I ’ of Man is active in
     all three parts of his inner life, in the sentient soul as well as
     in the intellectual soul , and in the consciousness soul.

     In the sentient-soul the ‘ I ’ is active in such a way that man is
     hardly aware of his I. In the sentient-soul, therefore, he is thus
     far given up to all his desires and passions. The ‘ I ’ broods dully
     in what we call the sentient-soul. It first works itself out and
     begins to appear in the intellectual-soul or mind-soul, and only
     becomes quite apparent in the spiritual-soul.

     If we wish to examine each of these three members of the human inner
--
     the transformation of the astral body itself, of the etheric body
     and of the physical body. But these transformations are still not
     what meets us as the actual human inner being or soul. The soul, the
     inner part of Man; consists of three modifications of the astral
     body. The three modifications must make use of certain instruments,
     and these express themselves in such a way, that
     * in the astral body the sentient soul is a sort of instrument,
     * in the etheric body the intellectual soul soul, and
     * in the physical body the consciousness soul.

     Thus we can distinguish the human inner being from that which is the
--

     [see full lecture as it describes what is contained in these three
     members of the soul, how to distinguish them from one another]

     ..

     in Man the ‘I’, his highest member, encloses within itself the
     sentient, the intellectual and consciousness souls.

1910-06-16-GA121
--
     was experienced in Europe, and hence the European felt this gradual
     ascent to the individual ‘I’ as the emerging from a kind of
     group-soul.

     [group soul]

     The Germanic Scandinavian still felt himself attached to a
     group-soul, belonging to a whole community, as if he were a part in
     the great body of his people. Thus only could it come about that
     nearly 100 years after the Christ-impulse had been given to the
--
     the ‘I’, the God who really presented him with the individual ‘I’.
     But he felt this God to be still united with the collective spirit
     of the tribe, with that which dwelt in the group-soul.

     To this group-soul was given the name Sif. That is the name of the
     spouse of Thor. Sif must linguistically be connected with the word
     Sippe-tribal relationship, and this connection really exists,
     although veiled and hidden. Occultly, however, Sif signifies the
     group-soul of the individual community from which the single
     individual grows forth. Sif is the being who unites herself with the
     God of the individual ‘I’, with the giver of the individual ‘I’,
--

     The collective culture of Europe is a gift of the European
     Mysteries. The progressive folk-souls are, as they progress, always
     the leaders of the collective culture of humanity. But at the time
     when these folk-spirits of Europe had to direct men to work from out
--
     Mysteries, a much more direct intercourse between the spiritual
     Beings and the people, because the ‘I’ was still united to the
     group-soul nature, and yet the Celtic element was to be the donor of
     the ‘I’ to the other part of the population. We might therefore say,
     that before the actual Germanic Scandinavian evolution began, the
--
     for the whole culture of Europe. Now out of this old culture,
     through intermingling with the many different races, peoples and
     subdivisions of peoples, the most varied folk-souls and folk-spirits
     were able to fertilize themselves, and they brought the ‘I’ into
     ever different conditions in order to educate it, the ‘I’ which has
--
     From the Atlantean down to the later post-Atlantean epoch the Indian
     folk-spirit went through the whole of the development of the inner
     soul forces, without his ‘I’ being wakened. He then returned to his
     work in the human etheric body. The essential thing in the old
     Indian culture is that the Indian, with completely developed
     soul-forces, with soul-forces refined to the highest point, goes
     back again into the etheric body, and within that he perfects those
     wonderfully delicate powers, the later reflection of which we see in
     the Vedas and in a still more refined condition in the Vedantic
     philosophy. All this was only possible because the Indian Folk-soul
     had evolved to high degree before the ‘I’ was seen and realized, and
     this again occurred at a time when man could perceive by means of
--
     [second Persian cultural age]

     The Persian Folk-soul had not progressed so far as this, only so far
     as to perception in the sentient body or astral body.

--
     It was again different at the time of the
     Egyptian-Babylonian-Chaldæan culture. That part of Man which we
     describe as the sentient soul was then able to perceive, and we must
     therefore describe this Egyptian-Chaldæan culture as working in the
     sentient soul.

     [fourth cultural age]

     The Græco-Latin folk-spirit was directed to the intellectual soul or
     soul of the higher feelings, and worked in that. He himself was only
     able to work upon this intellectual soul or soul of the higher
     feelings because it had a sort of expression of its nature in the
     etheric body. But this form of world-conception which now appeared
--
     In the other peoples which then follow upon the Greek people we have
     to deal principally with the use of the physical body for the
     development, stage by stage, of the consciousness or spiritual soul.
     Hence the Greek culture was one which we can only understand if we
     try to do so from within, if we realize that in this culture what is
--
     inner nature of the Greeks. On the other hand the peoples lying more
     towards the West and the North have the task, under the guidance of
     their folk-souls, of directing their gaze out into the world, and of
     seeing what is there to be seen on the physical plane, and of
     perfecting that which has to play a part on that plane. The Germanic
--
     previous evolution, but had been placed on the physical plane at one
     bound, as it were, before the birth of the human ‘I’ and therefore
     was only able under the guidance of its Folk-soul, of its archangel,
     to look after that which helped this human ‘I’ on the physical
     plane, that which was necessary for its well-being there. This was
--
     Roman people.

     [mixtures of people - development of the threefold soul]

     The other peoples, which grew out of the Roman civilization, already
     possessed more of what—coming so to say from the sentient soul, the
     intellectual soul (or Soul of the Higher Feelings) and from the
     spiritual soul itself—in some way or other fertilizes the ‘I’ and
     drives it out into the world. Therefore all the mixtures of races of
     which external history relates, which occurred on the Italian and
     Pyrenean Peninsula, in present-day France and in present-day Great
     Britain, were necessary in order to develop the ‘I’ in the different
     shades of the sentient soul, the intellectual soul and the
     consciousness oul on the physical plane. That was the great mission
     of those peoples which gradually developed in various ways in
--
       had to be developed in the direction of the Italian and Pyrenean
       peninsulas that which could be formed in the ‘I’ through the
       impulse of the sentient soul. If you study the several
       folk-characters in their light and shadow sides, you will find that
       in the peoples of the Italian and Pyrenean peninsulas there is a
       peculiar mingling of the ‘I’ with the Sentient Soul.
     * Then you will be able to understand the peculiar nature of those
       peoples who till now have lived in the land of France, if you
       consider the growth and mingling of the intellectual soul, with the
       ‘I’.
     * The great world-historical effects, however, which we may consider
       as represented by Great Britain, are to be traced back to the
       impulse of the consciousness soul penetrating into the human ‘I’.
       With the world-historical mission that proceeded from Great Britain
       is also connected that which proceeded from the founding of the
       external constitutional form. The union of the consciousness soul
       with the ‘I’ did not exist as yet inwardly. If, however, you
       recognize how this union came about between the consciousness soul
       and the ‘I’ that had been driven outwards, you will find that the
       great historical conquests made by the inhabitants of that island
--
       there in the founding of the parliamentary forms of government at
       once becomes comprehensible, if you know that an impulse of the
       consciousness soul was to be placed on the plane of the world's
       history.

--
     follow these things on further we should find pictures in history
     which would show us how the basic forces branch and work out in the
     most various ways. Thus did the peculiar constitution of the soul
     work among the western peoples, who had not preserved in themselves
     the direct elementary remembrance of the clairvoyantly experienced
--
     proceeded directly from a gradual, successive evolution of primeval
     clairvoyance and which had already been poured into the sentient
     soul, had to develop in quite a different way. Hence that current of
     inwardness, which indeed is only the after-effect of a more inward
     clairvoyant experience gone through in a former age. The Southern
     Germanic peoples had in the first place their task in the domain of
     the consciousness soul.

     The Græco-Latin age had to develop the intellectual soul. But it had
     not merely to give the impulse with this soul, it had to work also
     with a wonderful premature development that was endowed with
     clairvoyant experience. All this was poured into the Spiritual Souls
     of the Central European and Northern Germanic peoples. It worked
     among these souls as an inner capacity, and the Germanic peoples
     living more to the South had first of all to develop what pertains
     to the inward preparation of the Spiritual Soul, to fill it inwardly
     with the consciousness resulting from the old clairvoyance, but
     transposed on to the physical plane.
--
       to the abstract scientist are mere thoughts, to him were the great,
       mighty architects of the world. Hegel's world of ideas is the
       final, the most highly sublimated expression of the Spiritual Soul,
       and contains in pure concepts that which the Northman still saw as
       sensible-super-sensible, divine spiritual powers in connection with
       the ‘I’.
     * And when the ‘I’ was expressed in Fichte, it was nothing but a
       precipitation of what the God Thor had given to the human soul, now
       viewed from the Spiritual Soul in what seems to be the simplest of
       thoughts, the thought ‘I am,’ which is the starting-point of
       Fichte's philosophy.
--
     by the God Thor or Donar to the old Northern peoples from the
     spiritual world, down to this philosophy. This God had to prepare
     all this for the Spiritual Soul in order that the latter might
     receive its fitting contents, for its task is to look out into the
     outer world and to work within that world. But this philosophy does
     not discover merely the external, crude, materialistic experience,
     it discovers in the external world the contents of the Spiritual
     Soul itself, and looks upon Nature merely as the other side of idea.
     Take this on-working impulse, and in it you have the mission of the
     Northern Germanic peoples in Central Europe.
--

     You will now also understand that, with the Greeks, the life of the
     soul is remembrance. The picture of Oceanos arose in them, which is
     a memory of that Atlantean epoch. Their picture of the world is not
     so very incorrect, because it was drawn from the old Atlantean
--

     Let us recollect that the etheric body was evolved during the Indian
     civilization, the sentient body in the Persian, the sentient soul in
     the Egyptian-Chaldæan, the intellectual soul in the Græco-Latin, the
     consciousness soul in our own, which is not yet completed.

     Then comes the laying hold of the spirit-self by the spiritual or
     consciousness soul , so that the spirit-self shines into the
     spiritual or consciousness soul, which, as that is the task of the
     sixth stage of civilization, must be prepared for gradually. That
     civilization, which must be pre-eminently a receptive one, for it
     must reverently await the penetrating of the spirit-self into the
     spiritual soul, is being prepared by the peoples of Western Asia and
     the Slav peoples of Eastern Europe. These latter were pushed forward
     with their folk-souls, for the very good reason that everything
     which is to happen in the future, must in a certain way be prepared
     beforehand, must already push itself in, in order to provide the
--

     It is extremely interesting to study these advance guards of a
     folk-soul who is preparing himself for later ages. This accounts for
     the peculiar nature of the Slav peoples at present living to the
     East of us. Their whole culture gives the Western European the
--
     European peoples possess, viz., an impulse that continues in a
     straight line, which is still rooted in and has its source in the
     old clairvoyance. The peculiarity attaching to the souls of these
     Eastern European peoples is expressed in the whole attitude they
     have always shown when their relations to the higher worlds have
--
     individual Divine Figures. And what is felt to be the Blessed Child
     of these two worlds, stands in front of them as a third world. That
     is not an individual being, not a feeling in the soul, but something
     which is the product of the Heavenly Father and the Earth-Mother. In
     this way the relation of Devachan to the Earth is felt from the
     spiritual world. There, that which blossoms in the material body is
     felt as something altogether spiritual; and that which grows and
     blossoms in the soul, is perceived as the world which is at the same
     time felt to be the Blessed Child of the Heavenly Father and the
     Earth-Mother. Universal as these conceptions are we find them among
--
     in quite a different shade of feeling, connected more with the
     facts, creations and beings of Nature. We must conceive of this
     Eastern soul as being in a position to see an entity in an
     occurrence of Nature, of seeing not only the physically-sensible,
     but the astrally-spiritual. Hence the ideas of an immense number of
--
     this world of the East is preparing for that spirit which is to
     bring the Spirit-Self into Man, in readiness for that epoch when the
     Spiritual-Soul shall ascend to Spirit-Self, in the sixth age of
     post-Atlantean civilization, which is to succeed our own. We meet
     with this in a very unique manner not only in the creations of the
     Folk-Souls, which are as I have just described, but also in a
     wonderful preparatory fashion, in the various externalities of
     Eastern Europe and its culture.
--
1914-01-24-GA266/3

     The consciousness soul, intellectual soul and sentient soul should
     not be completely equated with willing, thinking and feeling, for
     the latter are to be found in each of the three soul members.

     People who are more feeling-beings come to esotericism, and namely,
--
1915-03-07-GA159

     The human soul can be understood in reality only if one knows that
     it consists of these three members. … Just as little somebody can
     study the human soul what is infinitely more important. For
     everybody should be a human being and everybody should know the
     soul. He, who does not feel in his soul that this soul lives in
     three members: sentient soul, intellectual soul or mind-soul,
     consciousness-soul, throws everything in the soul in a mess.
     * The sentient soul also is at first that what realizes, as it were,
       the desires, the more feeling impulses, more that in the current
       earth existence what we can call the more sensuous aspect of the
       human being. Nevertheless, this sentient soul contains the eternal
       driving forces of the human nature in its deeper parts at the same
       time. These forces go through birth and death.
     * The intellectual soul or mind-soul contains half the temporal and
       half the eternal.
     * The consciousness-soul, as it is now, directs the human being
       preferably to the temporal.

--
     her children through the wrath of Apollo.

consciousness soul

1916-10-10-GA168
--
     strength of this are brought together again.

     Now the self-contained consciousness soul can only develop - and its
     development is destined to take place in our time - when less
     importance is attached to what takes place at present between one
--

     At present, if a meeting is to take place that is to further the
     development of the consciousness soul, the moving factor between
     them must be what emerges in one or [the] other as the result of
     previous incarnations. This takes longer than recognition at first
--
     incarnations strike upwards.

     The consciousness soul can only develop when our contacts with other
     people are made from within; whereas the intellectual and mind soul
     develops more through immediate contact.

--

   "As a rule, we do not encounter anyone we have not met in previous
   incarnations, and if the Spiritual Soul is to develop as it should what
   happens between people today needs to play a lesser part than that
   which works from the previous incarnation."

   "The task of the Spiritual Soul age, which will only be achieved at its
   end, is indeed the gradual development of community. The principle of
   love, which through Christ was born in the individual on the physical
   plane, now ascends to the soul world to lay hold of a group."

1918-12-28-GA187
--
     consciousness of self still possessed elements of reality, while in
     our own era, which involves principally the development of the
     consciousness-soul, there is only a reflection of the true I in what
     we consciously call our I.

--
     A human being in our time should be fully conscious of the fact that
     in all he includes in the word “I” or “I am,” in all he holds in his
     consciousness when he observes his inner soul-being, he possesses
     only a reflection. This reflection even includes all the concepts
     directly connected with his I, concepts that must be worked through
     by his I. As humanity of this present age we no longer have anything
     of reality in our inner soul-life. The reality, our true being, only
     shines into us—I explained yesterday how it shines in—and what we
     bear within us is merely the reflection.
--
     Now we come to a fact that we have treated repeatedly from various
     points of view: namely, the change that is taking place in the
     constitution of the human soul. It indicates on the one hand the
     streaming forth of the revelation of the archai (Spirits of
     Personality); on the other hand, it indicates the liberation within
     the depths of men's souls of the impulse for freedom—a fact
     reflected now so urgently in the great demands mankind is raising.
     Today's social demands can only be understood if one is able to
     perceive this evolution in the constitution of the human soul. Call
     to mind a remark I made yesterday: that people are beginning—at
     least beginning, I said—to sense their true I when they come in
--

     Just so, a few thousand years from now, there will be unpleasant
     soul-conditions aroused when a Man wishes as an individual to have
     any sort of happiness in the world without its being shared by
     others. This interdependence of mankind is inherent in human
     evolution, and is making itself felt today in the social demands.
     This is simply the direction in which the human soul is developing.

   quotes to be qualified (not yet identified but seemingly from this
--
     A world view such as that based on anthroposophy must always be
     keenly conscious of the time context to which it belongs. We are now
     living in the age of consciousness soul development, a condition of
     soul wherein the all-important thing is for individuals to draw
     their own conclusions and learn to give facts an unprejudiced
     hearing, so that they can then make fully conscious judgments.

     The style of my presentations springs from an awareness that Man has
     entered upon the development of the conscious soul. This accounts,
     as I said, for the varying conclusions that can be drawn from my
     words. I try to present the facts as clearly as possible. But there
--
     people and what the effects of meat-eating are, I do so merely to
     present the facts, to make the truth known. In the age of the
     consciousness soul, anyone really acquainted with the facts of any
     case can confidently be left free to form his own judgments. It is
     essential to an anthroposophical view of things to be really clear
--

     ... we have to be clear when we are presenting anthroposophy that we
     are now living in the age of consciousness soul development. In
     other words, rational and intellectual capacities have become the
     most outstanding aspects of Man's present state of soul. Ever since
     the time of Anaxagoras, a philosopher of ancient Greece, we have
     been sifting every judgment, even those based on external
--
     so naturally to us today.

     But these abstract concepts educate our souls to the pure thinking
     described in my The Philosophy of Freedom. It is they that enable us
     to become free beings. Before people were able to think in
     abstractions they were not free, self-determined souls. One can
     develop into a free being only by keeping the inner man free of
     influences from outside, by developing a capacity to lay hold on
--
   As described in 1910-03-12-GA068B:

     Andacht is that what gets aroused in the soul as inner impulses for
     the unknown, for what we do not know yet, as we can not understand
     it yet.
--
     the unknown. All that we want to understand and can only understand
     once we have entered into it, this first has to work in us in a dark
     way as yearning or longing in our soul.

     That what draws us into that, what we have not yet grown into, under
--
   describes the Parsifal attitude of asking questions, based on this
   inner voice. What is often framed or labelled the attitude of asking
   questions, finds it spiritual roots in the consciousness soul .. "what
   gets aroused in the soul as inner impulses for the unknown"

   .
--

     'Andacht' (devotion) towards God the Father: Turning towards him,
     orienting myself towards him, in a seeking movement of the soul.

Note 2 - On the consciousness soul

1 - Introduction

   Rudolf Steiner describes the threefold soul, with the third and last
   element in its development called the consciousness soul or spiritual
   soul. On this FMC wiki site we use the term consciousness soul, but it
   is spiritual in nature, and Steiner even calls it the 'actual I-soul':

   "in the consciousness-soul, the actual I-soul, is integrated the
   spirit-self or manas .. the spirit self (or manas) is enclosed in the
   consciousness soul" (1907-12-27-GA101)

   In this commentary we will try to bring these concepts to life with the
--
       the various perspectives underneath.
     * note: the goal is not to try and outline or define what the
       consciousness soul is with a short description, or some bullet
       points or facts from Rudolf Steiner's lectures. All the latter is
       embedded in the training materials on this site in various
       contexts, as exemplified by the synthetic schemas where the
       consciousness soul appears, eg Schema FMC00.047A, Schema FMC00.236,
       Schema FMC00.232, Schema FMC00.046, Schema FMC00.233 (just some
       examples, non exhaustively). However such small facts or snippets
       of info taken together do not help to develop a kind of
       understanding of what is truly meant with the consciousness soul.
       For this, all this info has to be projected into an overall frame
       of understanding first. Thén the schemas can be linked and added
--
       so foundational base knowledge is assumed.
     * PS addition to the previous bullet, example from the anthrowiki
       page for consciousness soul:

     The consciousness soul (German: Bewusstseinsseele) is a transformed
     part of the astral body. During the Earth's evolution it emerged,
     when during the hyperborean time after the separation of the sun the
     earth condensed to the water state and the etheric body of the
     humans at the same time condensed to the light ether (Lit.:GA 13, p.
     225). The stimulators of the consciousness soul are the Jupiter
     beings (Lit.: GA 98, p. 198, GA 102, p. 59f). The consciousness soul
     is further formed by the I working unconsciously reshaping the
     physical body and reflecting this activity back into the astral
     body. This unconscious work of the I began at the end of the
     atlantic time and is striving towards a climax in our present
     cultural epoch. The consciousness soul is born as an independent
     member of the human beeing at the age of 35. Through appropriate
     spiritual training the consciousness soul is transformed into the
     imaginative soul (Lit.:GA 145, p. 176f). At the same time, the
     spirit self is already initially formed.

--
   is a good entry-point for this. See below right on this schema,
   depicting that the spiritual flows in from right to left and hence
   fructifies also the intellectual and sentient soul. Granted that - as
   often - the schema is dense and so please study (as always recommended)
   the lecture references that provide the narrative.

   Repeated here is the text from the Schema, because it essential for an
   imagination of the consciousness soul:

   Important for the understanding of the consciousness soul is the last
   row, and the influx of the spiritual from the right to the left.

--

   Imagine that the spiritual intuition is an inner knowing that ripples
   through from the soul (so from the higher spiritual self onto our human
   I) .. not based on external information from the senses. So not based
   on processing intellectually what one has read, for example, but having
   an inner compass (barometer, gyroscope) that advises or guides one
   invisibly on the true north. One may wonder: how come that I seem to
   have this reaction, assessment, attitude in my soul .. inner knowing ..
   where does it come from?

   That is a way to describe the consciousness soul. It goes further than
   the smart intellectual and rational thinking (as a computer can be
   programmed to process information).
--

   provides an interesting view, because like FMC00.431 it illustrates
   "how the I plays on the instrument of the soul and the different
   strings of human soul life", however it positions the consciousness
   soul with the regular Spirits of Form and the Christ Impulse as
   countering the Luciferic influence.

   From this it but a small step to see how the development of Man's
   various bodily principles, and the threefold soul, are linked to the
   cultural ages of the Current Postatlantean epoch, because the spiritual
   hierarchies make up Man and are in continuous development themselves,
--

   Specifically, see Schema FMC00.047 (and variants) on Current
   Postatlantean epoch: the threefold soul develops in the third, fourth,
   and current fifth cultural age.

--

   Schema FMC00.468 (ao on this page) .. illustrates that the
   consciousness soul is the basis for spiritualization.
     * PS: why the consciousness soul as the most refined part of the
       purified astral body? for this first see Schema FMC00.261 and
       variants on Astral world; then check Schema FMC00.508 on
--
   Bardon's IIH system of self-initiation.

   So the consciousness soul is the fulcrum (in french: point d'appui)
   that provides the basis for Man's transformation and spiritualization.
   Man becomes more susceptible and influenced by the spiritual, with
--
   causal body) part of Man's higher triad. This is then the basis for
   spiritual fructification by the Christ Impulse and the budhi spark.PS:
   why the consciousness soul as the most refined part of the purified
   astral body? for this see also Schema FMC00.261 and variants on Astral
   world
--
   Kundalini#Note 3 - The process of illumination

   Schema FMC00.438 illustrates this link between consciousness soul and
   Christ Impulse in a different way, from an evolutionary perspective.
   This has been prepared throughout the Current Postatlantean epoch with
--
   regarding how it maps the illustration on the right to the one on the
   left. However its intention is to illustrate that the consciousness
   soul is truly spiritual in that it includes the manas spirit-self part
   (see also 1907-12-27-GA101 quote above. This is also illustrated on the
   right in both Schema FMC00.086 and Schema FMC00.218 on Man's bodily
--
   (and Schema FMC00.380) on the Parsifal topic page.

3 - The pivotal importance of the consciousness soul

   Sometimes a certain lecture by Rudolf Steiner captures the essence and
--

   The extract below from 1907-11-20-GA100 (see also
   Mary#1907-11-20-GA100) coins the essence of the consciousness soul:

     Spirit-self is the same as the 'Holy Spirit', who according to
--

     the spirit-self had been born within them out of the consciousness
     soul.

     The 'mother' of such a spiritualised Man is not a bodily mother, she
     lies within him; she is the purified and spiritualised consciousness
     soul; she is the principle who gives birth to the higher Man.

     This spiritual birth, a birth in the highest sense, is described in
     St. John's Gospel. The spirit-self (or 'the Holy Spirit') pours into
     the most highly purified consciousness soul. This is referred to in
     the words, “I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and
     it abode upon him.” (John 1:32).

     As the consciousness soul is the principle in which the spirit-self
     develops, this principle is called the 'mother of Christ', or, in
     the occult schools, the 'Virgin Sophia'.
--
   and Kundalini#Note 3 - The process of illumination)

     When the Virgin Sophia [consciousness soul] encounters the Cosmic
     Universal I [spirit-self manas cosmic principle] which causes
     illumination, the pupil is surrounded by light, spiritual light.
     This second power that approaches the Virgin Sophia [consciousness
     soul], is called in esoteric Christianity, the 'Holy Spirit
     [spirit-self]

--

     .. the Virgin Sophia is the purified astral body [consciousness
     soul], and .. the 'Holy Spirit', the Cosmic Universal I [editor: the
     spirit-self, manas, which is a cosmic principle as it lies in the
     higher spirit world] which is received by the Virgin Sophia and
     which can then speak out of this purified astral body [consciousness
     soul]. ...

     Men of our age can receive the Virgin Sophia (the purified astral
     body [consciousness soul]) and the Holy Spirit
     [spirit-self](illumination) in the manner described, but only Christ
     Jesus could give to the Earth what was necessary to accomplish this.
--
     continued to remain on the Earth. Now, the important thing is, that
     this event .. must give something by which Man may gradually develop
     the beginnings of a purified astral body [consciousness soul] in the
     Christian sense.

     There had to be something there .. whereby Man could make his astral
     body gradually more and more like a Virgin Sophia [consciousness
     soul], and through it, receive into himself the Holy Spirit
     [spirit-self] which was able to spread out over the entire Earth,
     but which could not be received by anyone whose astral body did not
     resemble the Virgin Sophia [consciousness soul].

     ...
--
     the Gospel of St. John is the Gospel in which the writer has
     concealed powers which develop the Virgin Sophia [consciousness
     soul].

     At the cross, the mission was entrusted to him of receiving that
--
     with the Gospel of St. John and understand it spiritually, it has
     the force to lead you to Christian katharsis, it has the power to
     give you the Virgin Sophia [consciousness soul].

     Then will the Holy Spirit [spiritual principle of manas or
--
Perspective 1

   by Martin O'Keefe-Liddard (2025-10): The consciousness soul: where
   inner work meets world engagement

--
   we mean by "inner work" in this context?

   Rudolf Steiner described the consciousness soul as fundamentally
   different from earlier soul configurations:

     "The consciousness soul is related to the outer world in such a way
     that it makes this outer world into its own inner content... It
     transforms the world into inner experience." (GA026)

   Might this suggest something remarkable—that the consciousness soul
   doesn't develop by withdrawing from the world but precisely through a
   transformed relationship with it? Yet Steiner was equally clear:

     "The consciousness soul can only develop if man takes his
     development into his own hands... The consciousness soul must be
     worked for; it does not come of itself." (GA186)

   So what might it mean to "work for" the consciousness soul whilst
   recognizing it unfolds through world engagement?

--
   He said:

     "In the consciousness soul, thinking is no longer experienced as
     something given, but as something which man himself must bring
     about... Man must become conscious of his own activity in thinking."
--

   Is this work done in isolation, or within every encounter with the
   world? Steiner emphasized that the consciousness soul is inherently
   social:

     "The consciousness soul brings about a consciousness of the other
     person... Through the consciousness soul we experience not only
     ourselves but also the being of others." (GA026)

   Does the consciousness soul develop through isolated introspection, or
   through genuine meeting with others? Yet he was equally clear about
   conscience:

     "Conscience is the voice of the true self... It is the consciousness
     soul becoming aware of moral impulses that arise from the spirit."
     (GA107)

--
   synthesis:

     "The consciousness soul must work in two directions: inward, to
     conscious self-knowledge; outward, to conscious world-knowledge.
     These are not two separate activities but one single activity seen
--
   engagement met with developed inner capacity—a single breathing rhythm?
   How might each of us explore this living integration that the
   consciousness soul seems to require?

Perspective 2
--
   with the words of Rudolf Steiner, but these remain thought forms. We
   try to make sense of concepts, intellectually, we can remain in the
   intellectual soul. The term and concept 'consciousness soul' is an
   example, so is 'living thinking'. And imho (and I say this with the
   greatest love and respect and not as a critique at all), one (we all)
--
   willing as they arise in engagement with the world. Not as preparation
   for a higher state to be achieved later, but as the actual work of
   developing the consciousness soul now, in the midst of ordinary life.

   For many—perhaps most—people today, the consciousness soul develops not
   through achieving meditative states, but through learning to observe
   their own conditioning, reactions, and motivations whilst engaged with
--
   practice. What I was suggesting is that for many, this same capacity
   develops more gradually and naturally through conscious engagement with
   life itself—which is, after all, what the consciousness soul uniquely
   requires.

--
   other daily practices such as brushing teeth, etc .. so what is it that
   we don't have time for 20' a day like in the morning or evening .. to
   spend on cleaning our soul or be alone with one's Self? Is it like our
   pet animal cat or dog that does everything it can to not take the
   medicine we know is good for them and they need when we want to help
--
       some people know from having been to areas of war and famine, the
       worst conditions will bring out the very best in human beings, it
       is transformative for the soul. Then, with nothing left, more will
       be pushed into the pool and have plenty of time for the
       experiential.
--
   change you want to see in the world.

   But if only this drop can help in one soul, to touch the heart, so in
   the next incarnation one will cross the bridge from worldview to
   self-initiation, then writing this will have been worthwhile.
--
   by Annael

   The consciousness soul gives birth to the true spiritual human 'I',
   from the astral world to the spirit world.

--
   connecting to layer 3 of the lower spirit world Schema FMC00.136

   This means the soul is strongly connected with the moral foundation and
   every human being. So morality is the base upon which one must build
   one's understanding of the consciousness soul. That is why Rudolf
   Steiner mentions conscience, because it is connected with the Law of
   Morality.

   The task of the consciousness soul and the work on the astral body to
   spirit-self, is to start living and using the outer physical material
   world in such a way that the Law of Morality is fulfilled and
--

   And, the spiritual worldview of the now public lesser mysteries
   naturally should lead souls to realize the key step for the individual
   is towards the great Work and what in our age becomes self-initiation.
   Maybe we are not yet at a sufficient stage of maturity of the
   consciousness soul.

   My conclusion and working hypothesis to date is that people do not
--
References and further reading

     * Owen Barfield: Of the consciousness soul' (1928, essay), also
       published in 'Romanticism Comes of Age' (1944, 1966)
     * F. W. Zeylmans van Emmichoven:
          + 'The Anthroposophical Understanding of the Soul' (1982 in EN,
            original in NL 1946: 'De Menselijke Ziel')
          + 'Gespräche über die Hygiene der Seele' (1946, 1988)
--
                 everyone's lips again today. A “self-help book” on an
                 anthroposophical basis in the best sense of the word.
     * Karl König : 'The human soul' (1959 in EN, in NL 1964/1996)
     * Otto Julius Hartmann (1895-1985):
          + Die Frage nach der Seele: die menschl. Seele in Beziehung zu
--
          + Von den Geheimnissen der menschlichen Seele (1982-84)
     * Robert J. Sardello
          + 'Facing the world with soul - The Reimagination of Modern
            Life' (1974 in EN, also in NL as 'De ziel in de wereld : Een
            andere, spirituele benadering van het dagelijks leven')
          + The Power of Soul: Living the Twelve Virtues (2002)
     * Jacques Lusseyran: Contre la pollution de moi (1992)
     * Joseph Ennemoser: 'Untersuchungen über den Ursprung und das Wesen
       der menschlichen Seele (1980)

     * John Gunning: 'The balance of the soul' ('Seelengleichgewicht'),
       articles Part 1 and 2 in Anthroposophical Quarterly No 21, issue 2.
     * Christof Gestrig: 'Die menschliche Seele. Hermeneutik ihres
--
       Wiese: 'Psychologie des Ich: Anthroposophie, Psychotherapie' (2021)
     * Johannes Kiersch: On Rudolf Steiner’s Conception of Consciousness
       Soul (2021)
     * Roland van Vliet: 'Freedom, the I and Love: A Philosophy of Love'
       (2022)
