                    # dharmadevi-and-narayan-meditating-250×188-180×180
                      Learn how to calm your mind, still your body, and
                      open the doorway to the joy of your soul.
                    # Learn Meditation
          +
--
          + Yoga
          + What is Prana – Prana Definition
          + Soul
          + Samadhi
          + Ananda

Soul

   [sohl]

What Is the Soul?

Definition of Soul, from the Teachings of Self-Realization

   Woman standing with outstretched arms at sunset

   The word “soul” can be used in different ways. There is the pure soul,
   the Spirit of God in each individual, as ever-existing, ever-conscious,
   ever-new Bliss. The soul as God’s reflection has the same qualities as
   God.

   However, the soul can become identified with the physical body, and
   take on its characteristics. This identification is often referred to
   as the ego. When people speak of “spiritual progress” or “soul
   evolution” they are using this definition, because the soul that
   recognizes its true identity as part of God is already perfect.

   In this context, souls only “evolve” or “progress” in the sense that
   they go from identifying with their physical bodies to realizing their
   unity with God.  (1)
--
Merriam Webster Dictionary Definition

   The meaning of soul as defined in the dictionary:

   Soul /sōl/ noun
    1. the spiritual part of a person that is believed to give life to the
       body and in many religions is believed to live forever
--
       to appreciate beauty and art, etc. (2)

   In many traditions, the soul is understood as the immaterial essence or
   spiritual core of a human being or other sentient life, distinct from
   the physical body and often regarded as immortal.
--
   In the first few pages of Autobiography of a Yogi, Paramhansa Yogananda
   suggests that the most substantial part of man is not the body but the
   immaterial soul:

     “But if prophets down the millenniums spake with truth, man is
     essentially of incorporeal nature.”

Do Other Creatures Have Souls or Only Humans?

     “Reincarnation starts from crystals and reaches the human sphere of
     existence. After eight million lives, the soul passes to the body of
     a man. Matter suppresses the Spirit, which is trying to reform
     matter from within by evolutional coaxing.

     “A metallic soul, a vegetable soul, and a human soul: the bodies are
     different, but the soul is the same. Reincarnation is the process
     through which the Spirit returns to Itself — from the many to the
     one.”
--
     —Paramhansa Yogananda, Karma and Reincarnation

Do Souls Reincarnate After Death?

     “The body is the residence and the soul is the resident. The fleshly
     house is perishable and the soul, being the image of Spirit, is
     imperishable. Therefore, when the body dies, the soul has to shift
     somewhere else for shelter.

     “Because of the soul’s intimate contact with the body, it develops
     physical desires. These imperfect material attachments cling to the
     disembodied soul and prevent it from returning to the Spirit. Thus,
     the immortal soul has no other alternative but to come back to the
     mortal school of life to work out its imperfections.”

--
   desires. (3)

Qualities of the Soul
From the Bhagavad Gita, Chapter 2, Verses 18–29

--
   scripture in India. According to Paramhansa Yogananda, it is the
   quintessence of India’s ancient teachings. (4) In it, Krishna expands
   on the meaning of the soul for his disciple, Arjuna.

     “That indwelling Self is ever changeless, imperishable, and without
--

     “Just as a person removes a worn-out garment and dons a new one, so
     the soul living in a physical body (removes and) discards it when it
     becomes outworn, and replaces it with a new one.

     “Weapons cannot cut the soul; fire cannot burn it; water cannot
     drown it; wind cannot wither it away!

     “The soul is never touched; it is immutable, all-pervading, calm,
     unshakable; its existence is eternal.

     “The soul cannot even be pondered by the reasoning mind. It (the
     Self) is unmanifested and formless. Realize this truth, and abstain
     from lamentation.
--
     senses. Why lament a thing you can’t see?

     “Some (people) behold the soul in amazement. Others describe (the
     experience of it) as marvelous. Still others, hearing it, listen,
     and proclaim it wonderful. The rest, even if they hear all about it,
     comprehend it not at all.” (5)

The Unique Essence of Each Soul

   IFRAME: https://www.youtube.com/embed/o8NdWq-3Zuo
--
   References
    1. ↩ Paramhansa Yogananda, Inner Culture magazine, September 1939
    2. ↩ Merriam Webster definition of “soul,” found November 12, 2015.
    3. ↩ Karma and Reincarnation, Paramhansa Yogananda. Chapter 5,
       “Reincarnation”
