    #Learning Mind » Feed Learning Mind » Comments Feed Learning Mind »
   What Is a Soul? 5 Thought-Provoking Theories to Consider Comments Feed
   oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML) JSON

--
     *

What Is a Soul? 5 Thought-Provoking Theories to Consider

     Home>
--
     Human Brain>

     What Is a Soul? 5 Thought-Provoking Theories to Consider

     * Post author:Caroline Hindle, M.A.
--
     * Post category:Food for Thought / Human Brain / Spirituality

   What is a soul? Here are five theories from philosophy, religion, and
   science, along with quotations from the finest spiritualists of our
   time:

     Deepak Chopra: The soul is the core of your being. It is eternal. It
     doesn’t exist in space/time. It’s a field of infinite possibilities,
     infinite creativity. It’s your internal reference point with which
     you should always be in touch.

1. What is a soul according to the Ancient Greeks?

   By and large, the Ancient Greek tradition didn’t think of the soul in
   terms of a spiritual substance inhabiting the body of human beings
   alone, but rather as a life force which animates all living organisms,
--
   [INS: :INS]

   Plato, who divided the soul into three parts (the logical, the
   spirited, and the appetitive) seems to have been the first to suggest
   that the soul is something immortal that could outlive the body, and
   which inhabits the body until death.

   Aristotle also divided the soul into three degrees. The first degree,
   for him, was to be found in all living organisms, including plants, and
   this is what governed the natural functions such as reproduction and
   growth.

   The second degree of soul was to be found in animals and human beings,
   but not in plants, and this was the soul that governed the senses:
   sight, hearing, touch, taste and smell.

   The third degree was to be found in human beings alone, the
   intellectual or rational soul, and this soul gave the capacity for
   thought and reflection. Aristotle seems to have been opposed to Plato’s
   idea that the soul and the body were distinct from each other.

     Eckhart Tolle: The soul is your innermost being. The presence that
     you are beyond form. The consciousness that you are beyond form,
     that is the soul. That is who you are in essence.

2. The view a soul in Hinduism and Buddhism

   In Hindu and Buddhist worldviews, the Atman is the individual soul or
   self and the Brahman is the world soul. The Atman is the vital force
   that animates and operates in every form of life, not just in humans.
   It is the essence of all beings.
--
   the realization that the mind and the Atman are different things.

     Llewellyn Vaughan-Lee: The soul is a divine part of our self. It is
     our divine nature. It is a part of us that is one with God.
     Everybody has a soul. It is the immortal internal part of ourselves.
     It never dies. It’s immortal. It belongs to God.

3. What is a soul in Judaism and Kabballah?

   In the Hebrew Scriptures, the soul and the body are not distinguished
   from each other clearly. There is no separate word for the soul, but
   the word ru’ah which means ‘breath’ or ‘wind’ and nefesh, which refers
   to something animate as opposed to something dead, are used for the
   purposes of referring to the soul.
   [INS: :INS]

   Jewish mysticism, or Kabballah, sees the soul as divine emanation that
   has evolved downwards to enter the body, and it’s ultimate goal is to
   return upwards to its source through the sephirot, or emanations of the
--
   physical manifestation of earthly things.

     Wayne Dyer: The soul is the birthless, deathless, changeless part of
     us. The part of us that looks out from behind our eyes and has no
     form. The soul is infinite so there is no in or out of it. It is
     everywhere. There’s no place that it is not.

4. How Christianity regards a soul

   In Christianity, the idea of the resurrection had a great influence on
   the conception of the soul in general. The soul became associated with
   the belief that the person, including the earthly body, would be
   resurrected in their entirety in paradise.
--
   Plato, as the New Testament was translated into Greek and its spread
   very quickly became a Greek-led movement. The dualism of Plato, i.e.
   the idea that the soul was a non-material entity stuck in the material
   body, had a big influence on Christian thought.

   St. Augustine, one of the most influential of Christian thinkers, wrote
   that the soul is immortal, as opposed to the body, which is not.
   However, he claimed that the soul derives life from God as the body
   derives life from the soul. He proposed that the soul could die if God
   abandoned it, just as the body dies when the soul abandons it.

     Michael Singer: The indwelling consciousness that watches the mind
     come and go. That watches the heart come and go, the emotions of the
     heart. And watches the world pass before you. You, the conscious,
     the consciousness, the center of being, is soul.

5. Views of a soul in Science/Materialism

   Materialists, using science to back up their claims, tend to believe
   that there is no distinction between what we call the soul and the
   functions of the brain.

   In a debate with modern spiritualists and religious thinkers on the
   science behind brain and soul, neuroscientist Sam Harris makes the
   following argument:

   ‘Damage areas of the brain and faculties are lost, and they’re clearly
   lost. It’s not that everybody with brain damage has the soul perfectly
   intact but they just can’t get the words out – everything about your
   mind can be damaged by damaging the brain.
--
    5. Aristotle, De Anima

   What is a soul for you? Which of these definitions do you agree with?
   Do you have your own definition?
     * Author
--
    1.
   Don January 5, 2017 Reply
       I have never had a description of soul, only a feeling of what
       might be closest. From this post I like a combination of what
       Deepak Chopra said and Hindu/Buddhism, although I do not see a
       separation of two elements of soul. I believe in total
       interconnectedness in the deep reality of what we think of as all
       things. Perhaps the soul could be best described as thought from
       our standpoint which includes all life.
    2.
   Dayana January 8, 2017 Reply
       The soul is like the black box on an airplane, it records
       everything from life after life, is your journal for all your
       lifetime experiences good and bad. We can always open up the box
       for reference in our present situation. The answers are inside of
       us. What I called your gut instinct. 😘😘😘😘😘 that’s the soul to me.
       The master mind. 😊😊😊😊
    3.
   Michael Light January 17, 2017 Reply
       This is a long comment, but to understand what a soul is u must
       understand why u r here –
       1.What is true evolution? Everything may have come from a single pt
--
       octahedron (a back 2 back pyramid) that fits inside a sphere(ie
       Father’s clue – The Great Pyramid).The sphere is the shape your
       soul would b if it is Light.He searches for patterns of acceptable
       bad in u so He can use u like a Fly. What does a Fly do? It is
       trying 2 unbalance u so u release charged energy ie. energy
