   #alternate alternate

   IFRAME: https://careers.rituals.com/_sst/ns.html?id=GTM-NFF8KT6

   JobsWork in our ShopsWork at our OfficesAbout usLife at Rituals

   (BUTTON) EN
   (BUTTON)

   Article

The meaning of working with heart and soul: employee stories | part 2

What does working with heart and soul mean to Rituals employees? In this
second chapter of our three-part series, we explore what our colleagues
describe as working with ‘dedication and passion’. Find out what brings
energy and meaning to their work at Rituals.

   Shop employees having a chat

What our team says: ‘it’s about dedication and passion’

   Many of our colleagues are driven by contagious enthusiasm and fully
   committed to their work. It's not just about the job; it's about
   bringing your whole self to work.

   Sebastian Maar, our Head of Retail Operations in the Netherlands, lays
   it out plain and simple: "To me, working with heart and soul means I go
   the extra mile. I invest my energy into every aspect of my work, aiming
   for nothing less than excellence." He finds creating a supportive
   environment essential to this and leads by example. For instance, he
   enjoyed participating in the opening process when launching our first
   outlet stores in our Benelux market. From being on the shop floor
   building up the store to filling the shelves with products, preparing
   the team and much more, Sebastian worked closely and hands-on with his
   team to create a memorable and best-in-class shop opening.

   Nicol Burzawa, Shop Manager in Poland, says to her it’s about “being
   emotionally involved in what I do." She shares that she is a fan of the
   brand as a customer and an employee. "This allows me to be authentic
   and have deeper connections with colleagues and customers."

   Employees connecting in store

   Martin Thun, Head of Training NORDICS, sees his work as an extension of
   his passion, "When you feel so passionate about your work that it
   almost doesn’t feel like work." He notices that, for example, with
   himself and his colleagues when hosting a training where you do not
   just focus on know-how transfer but put the participants in the centre
   of attention. Then everyone’s personality can break through, and it is
   not only about knowledge but also about passion.

   Shop Manager Moises Rodes from Spain talks about feeling enthusiastic
   and energising. “In the shop, I make an effort to create a healthy
   environment for the team and the customers.” His team achieves this by
   looking after each other through personal conversations and giving and
   asking for feedback to grow together. Simply listening is the key for
   him. Other examples of Moises creating a unique work atmosphere are
   celebrating the achievement of monthly targets with the whole team and
   having monthly challenges to make daily shifts extra fun. For instance,
   his team loves the themed "video challenges" to have fun and explore
   creativity.

Committed to loving what you do

   What leaves us fulfilled at the end of each day may differ for
   everyone, but our colleagues agree fuelling your tasks with love and
   commitment is definitely a part of working with heart and soul.

   Read more stories from our colleagues and discover what working with
   heart and soul means to them: empathy and connection and personal
   fulfilment and growth.

Want to work with people who love what they do?

   Explore career opportunities at Rituals
   Shop employee Rituals

   (BUTTON)
   Previous Card

More stories from Rituals

   Employee helping a customer in store

The meaning of working with heart and soul: employee stories | part 1

   Read more
   Rituals employee

The meaning of working with heart and soul: employee stories | part 3

   Read more
   Rituals shop employee smiling

Explore your Retail career path at Rituals: from sales advisor to shop
manager

   Read more
   (BUTTON)
   Next Card

   Work with
     * Work in our shops
     * House of Rituals
     * Learn & grow in the shops
     * Shop employee benefits

     * Work at our offices
     * Internships
     * Learn & grow at the office
     * Office employee benefits

     * About us
     * Work with heart & soul
     * Sustainability & impact
     * Diversity & inclusion
     * Life at Rituals

     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

   Cookie policyPrivacy policyEmployee loginGo to Rituals.com
