   #AnthroWiki (en) AnthroWiki Atom feed

Anonymous

Not logged in

     * Log in

   AnthroWiki

Search

   ____________________
   Search Go

                  exploring together new paths of knowledge
        A free initiative by people at anthro.wiki, anthro.world and
                                 biodyn.wiki

   [Donate_small.gif] Find out how you can support the further development
   of AnthroWiki with your donation.

   ᐃ
   ᐁ

Soul

   From AnthroWiki

Namespaces

     * Page
     * Discussion

More

     * More
     * Languages

Page actions

     * Read
     * View source
     * History

   [330px-Frederic_Lord%2C_Leighton_-_The_Bath_of_Psyche_-_Google_Art_Proj
   ect.jpg] Frederic Leighton: The Bath of Psyche, 1890

   The soul (from Indo-European: *saiwalō or *saiwlō, probably derived
   from *saiwaz, "lake"; German: Seele), called psyche (Greek: ψυχή
   "breath"; Latin: anima) by the ancient Greeks and therefore
   occasionally also called breath soul, is that essential member of man's
   being which connects his bodily and spiritual existence.

   „By body is meant here that, by which the things of his environment
   reveal themselves to man [...] By the word soul is meant that, by which
   he connects the things with his own existence, by which he feels
   pleasure and displeasure, lust and displeasure, joy and pain at them.
   As spirit is meant that which is revealed in him when he, according to
   Goethe's expression, regards things as "as it were divine being". - In
   this sense man consists of body, soul and spirit.“ (Lit.:GA 9, p. 26f)

   Anthroposophy thus represents the trichotomy, the threefold division of
   the human being into the three essential members spirit, soul and body.
   In the Catholic Church, the doctrine of trichotomy has been considered
   heresy since the Fourth Council of Constantinople (869). It was
   replaced by the dichotomy, which concedes man only body and soul and
   denies his independent spirit. This dualistic view continues to have an
   effect in philosophy and the sciences to this day, as is shown by the
   never-ending discussions about the body-soul problem, which are
   primarily linked to Descartes' postulated division of the human being
   into a spatially extended physical res extensa and an inextensible,
   point-like soul-spirit res cogitans. How there should be a
   psychophysical interaction between these completely different
   substances remains completely unclear. From the anthroposophical point
   of view body, soul and spirit are not different substances, but in the
   sense of a consistent monism different manifestations of one and the
   same spiritual substance. This can be compared pictorially with water,
   which can appear as gaseous steam, as liquid water and as solid frozen
   ice.

   The inner world of the soul, which in its full development is only
   possible for man, is divided into three parts which can be
   distinguished in the aura. Its body-bound parts, namely the sentient
   soul, the intellectual or mind soul and also the part of the
   consciousness soul facing the sensual world are subject to mortality;
   only the part of the consciousness soul facing the spirit is immortal.
   However, this immortal part of the soul is not given a priori and
   unlosable, but must be actively attained and preserved (see →
   immortality of the soul).

   According to its substantial nature, the soul originates from the
   astral body, which in turn has separated itself from the astral world.
   The soul is the organ of consciousness, of desires and sensations, and
   of the human soul faculties of thinking, feeling, and willing, which
   determine the life of the soul. Artistically, it is usually represented
   in female form.
   [ ]

Contents

     * 1 Body, Soul and Spirit
          + 1.1 Sophia
          + 1.2 Virgin Sophia
          + 1.3 Two-soul doctrine
          + 1.4 The immortal soul
          + 1.5 Body and soul
     * 2 The soul as inner world
     * 3 The three soul members
     * 4 Old and young souls
     * 5 The fate of the soul after death
     * 6 I-consciousness in earthly life and after death
     * 7 Immortality of the soul
          + 7.1 Personal immortality
     * 8 Descent of the souls
     * 9 Literature
     * 10 References

Body, Soul and Spirit

   The human soul is often personified in female form. Originally, as some
   Gnostic writings suggest, it was an androgynous, i.e. dual-sex
   male-female being, which only assumed its single-sex female form
   through its fall into the sensual world. For example, the "Exegesis on
   the Soul" found among the Nag Hammadi scriptures states:

     „The sages who lived before us gave the soul a feminine name. In
     fact, it is also a woman by nature. It has a womb just like other
     women. As long as it was alone with the father, it was a virgin and
     man-feminine in form. But when she fell into a body and came into
     this life, she fell into the power of many robbers. And the wicked
     threw her to one another and defiled her. Some abused her violently,
     while others acted in such a way as to persuade her with a seductive
     gift. In short, she was ravished, and she lost her virginity [...].
     But she is wont to become a poor widow, having no help; neither has
     she any to hear her in her affliction; for she had received nothing
     from them but the ravishings which they had inflicted on her when
     they had dealings with her. And the children she brought forth with
     the adulterers are dumb and blind and sick. But when the Father, who
     is in heaven above, seeks her and looks down upon her and sees her
     groaning with her sufferings and shame, and how she repents of the
     fornication she has committed, and how she begins to call upon his
     name that he may help her, crying out with all her heart, saying:
     "Save me, my Father, for behold: I will give account to thee, for I
     have left my house, and fled out of my virgin chamber. Bring me back
     to thee again!" and when he sees her that she is in this state, he
     will hold her worthy of his mercy; for numerous are the sorrows that
     have come upon her because she has left her house.“

   – Exegesis on the soul: (NHC II,6)

Sophia

   Sophia (Greek: Σοφíα "wisdom") is often called the female aspect of the
   Godhead in Gnosis. As the world soul, she is the macrocosmic analogue
   of the human soul or the group soul of mankind. She is often equated
   with the Holy Spirit (here thought of as female). In many cases it
   appears as the lowest of the aeons emanated by the Godhead, which in
   their totality form the Pleroma. Through its fall it becomes the cause
   for the creation of the material world. A distinction is also often
   made between a higher and lower aspect of Sophia. The lower or inferior
   Sophia, which dwells outside the Pleroma, is then also called Achamoth
   (Greek: Ἀχαμώθ) by the Valentinians. Sometimes she is also called
   Prunikos (Greek: Προύνικος), which according to Epiphanius of Salamis
   is supposed to mean something like "harlot" or "the lustful one"^[1] -
   but this meaning of the word is not regarded as certain.

Virgin Sophia

   → See also: Virgin Sophia

   In Christian esotericism, the Virgin Sophia is the astral body that has
   been purified of lower sensual desires and elevated to the spirit self,
   corresponding to Isis in pre-Christian times. She stands for the
   completely pure human or human soul. In esoteric Christianity, the
   mother of Jesus was always called the "Virgin Sophia", as also by John
   the Evangelist; only exoterically does he call her the "Mother of
   Jesus".

Two-soul doctrine

   The two-soul doctrine, still advocated by the Byzantine patriarch
   Photius I, according to which man has a higher, immortal spirit-soul
   and an earthly, transient soul, was banned at the Fourth Council of
   Constantinople in 869. The spirit was to be reserved for God alone. The
   doctrine of the trichotomy, according to which man consists of spirit,
   soul and body, has since been considered heresy in the Roman Catholic
   Church. It was replaced by the dichotomy, which concedes man only body
   and soul and denies his independent spirit. Thus, as Rudolf Steiner
   often puts it, "the spirit was abolished".

The immortal soul

   According to the anthroposophical view, however, it is precisely the
   immortal individual spirit, the I of man, that reincarnates and, apart
   from exceptional cases^[2], not the largely perishable soul, which
   after death, through its purification in the Kamaloka (purgatory) and
   in the higher realms of the soul world, disperses to its imperishable
   remnant (entelechy) in the general astral world and must be largely
   rebuilt anew and with different qualities for the next earthly
   incarnation. The immortality of the soul is not given from the
   beginning, but is only acquired with the consciousness soul oriented
   towards the spiritual through the activity of the I. The doctrine of
   the reincarnation of the spirit must therefore be strictly
   distinguished from the transmigration of the soul or metempsychosis.
   The body is subject to heredity, the soul to the fate (karma) created
   in previous earthly lives, and the spirit continues to develop through
   successive incarnations.

Body and soul

   Plato still perceived the body as a dungeon or even a grave of the soul
   (Greek: τὸ μὲν σῶμά ἐστιν ἡμῖν σῆμα to men soma estin hemin sema,
   literally: "The body is a grave for us."^[3]), whereby it could only
   fully develop and ascend into eternity in the body-free state after
   death. In Christianity, on the other hand - in sharp contrast to this -
   it is precisely the inherent and indissoluble body-relatedness^[4] of
   the soul that appears as its central characteristic, which is what
   makes it a truly human soul. For Thomas Aquinas, the most essential
   destiny of the soul, according to Aristotelian hylemorphism, is to be
   the form of the body (Latin: anima forma corporis)^[5]. As an immortal
   substance, it remains after death, but without body it cannot develop
   its full potential and loses its personhood^[6], which it only has
   in^[7] the body. After death, therefore, it has a lesser mode of
   existence than in the embodied state and only achieves its perfection
   through the resurrection of the body, which is made possible by the
   all-surpassing love and grace of God in that God Himself became man in
   Jesus Christ, passed through death on Golgotha and rose again on the
   third day.

   In the meantime, with increasing materialism, the understanding not
   only of the spirit but also of the soul, namely of its continued
   existence after death, has been largely lost. This development has not
   stopped at contemporary theology either, for example in the form of the
   whole-death theory advocated mainly by Protestant theologians or the
   increasingly widespread talk in Catholic theology since the middle of
   the 20th century of immediate resurrection in death, which at the same
   time also de facto "abolishes" the immortal soul.

The soul as inner world

   „As its own inner world, the soul essence of man is distinct from his
   corporeality. The inner world is immediately apparent when attention is
   drawn to the simplest sense sensation. No one can know at first whether
   another experiences such a simple sensation in exactly the same way as
   he does. It is known that there are people who are colour-blind. Such
   see things only in various shades of grey. Others are partially
   colour-blind. They are therefore unable to perceive certain nuances of
   colour. The view of the world that their eye gives them is different
   from that of so-called normal people. And the same applies more or less
   to the other senses. It is obvious that even simple sensory perception
   belongs to the inner world. With my bodily senses I can perceive the
   red table, which the other also perceives; but I cannot perceive the
   other's sensation of red. - One must therefore call the sensation of
   the senses a spiritual thing. If one only makes this fact quite clear
   to oneself, then one will soon cease to regard inner experiences as
   mere brain processes or the like. - First of all, the sensation is
   followed by the feeling. The one sensation gives the human being
   pleasure, the other displeasure. These are impulses of his inner, his
   spiritual life. In his feelings, man creates a second world for himself
   in addition to the one that affects him from the outside. And a third
   is added: the will. Through it, the human being has an effect on the
   outside world. And through this he imprints his inner being on the
   outer world. The soul of the human being flows outwards, as it were, in
   his acts of will. This distinguishes man's deeds from the events of
   outer nature, that the former bear the stamp of his inner life. Thus
   the soul, as man's own, confronts the outer world. He receives stimuli
   from the outer world; but in accordance with these stimuli he forms a
   world of his own. Physicality becomes the underground of the soul.“
   (Lit.:GA 9, p. 30f)

The three soul members

   The human soul is formed by the fact that the individual human I works
   subconsciously and constantly on the three lower, bodily members of man
   and that this work is reflected in corresponding changes in the astral
   body. This results in a threefold structure of the human soul.

   "We must again bear in mind that what we call the actual human soul
   life, the human inner being, is not simply a chaos of sensations,
   drives, ideas, passions, ideals, surging through one another; but we
   must tell ourselves with all clarity that this human soul breaks down
   into three separate members; that we can distinguish quite precisely:
   the lowest soul member, the sentient soul; the middle soul member, the
   intellectual or mind soul; and the highest soul member, the
   consciousness soul. These three members are to be distinguished in the
   human soul life. But they must not fall apart in this human soul. The
   human soul must be a unity. What is it in the human being that unites
   these three members of the soul into a unity? That is precisely what we
   call in the actual sense the human "I", the bearer of human
   self-awareness.|58|145f}}

   Corresponding to the three lower members of man, the following soul
   members are thus incorporated into the astral body:

                   1. Sentient soul
                   2. Intellectual or mind soul
                   3. Consciousness soul

   „One can again unreservedly have the will to triviality and say: Why do
   you anthroposophists have the spleen to distinguish in the soul three
   soul members and even many members in human nature? You speak of a
   sentient soul, an intellectual soul and a consciousness soul. It would
   be much simpler to speak of the soul as a unified entity in which
   thought, feeling and volition take place - it is certainly simpler,
   more convenient - and trivial too. But at the same time this is also
   something that the scientific contemplation of man cannot in truth
   promote. For it is not from the longing to divide and to make many
   words that the division of the human soul into sentient soul arises,
   that is, into that part which first enters into contact with the
   environment and receives the perceptions and sensations from outside,
   in which the desires and instincts also develop, and which is then to
   be separated from that part in which what has been gained has already
   been processed in a certain sense. We bring our sentient soul into
   activity by facing the outside world, receiving from it impressions of
   colour and sound, but also allowing to emerge what we as normal human
   beings do not have in hand at first: our drives, desires and passions.
   But when we withdraw and process within ourselves what we have taken in
   through perceptions and so on, so that what is stimulated in us by the
   outer world is transformed into feelings, then we live in the second
   soul member, in the intellectual or mind soul. And in so far as we
   direct and guide our thoughts and are not led on a string, we live in
   the consciousness soul.

   In "Occult Science" or in "Theosophy" you will see that the three
   members of the soul have many more relations - of a different kind - to
   what is in the outer world, not because we take pleasure in the
   division, but because what we call the sentient soul is related to the
   cosmos in quite a different way than what we call the consciousness
   soul.

   It is the consciousness soul that isolates the human being, that makes
   him feel like an inwardly closed being. What we call the intellectual
   soul brings him into relationship with his surroundings and with the
   whole cosmos, making him a being that appears like an extract, like a
   confluence of the whole world. Through the consciousness soul, man
   lives in himself, isolates himself. The most important thing that one
   experiences in the consciousness soul is that which one develops most
   late in life: the ability to think logically, to have opinions,
   thoughts and so on. That rests in the consciousness soul. In relation
   to these qualities, the individual nucleus of the human being, which
   comes into existence through birth, is indeed most predisposed to
   isolation. This innermost core of being works itself out most late in
   the human being. While his envelope, his bodily organisation, emerges
   earliest, his actual individuality emerges latest. But as man is at
   present - he was different in the past and will be different in the
   future - he indeed develops his opinions, concepts, ideas in the most
   isolated part of his being. These, therefore, have the least influence
   on the whole structure and formation of his total personality, and also
   come out as an annex only when the total personality is firmly
   established, plastically formed.“ (Lit.:GA 60, p. 237ff)

   The first disposition of the sentient soul was created when the Earth
   was condensed to the state of fire in the polar age, which in a certain
   way repeated the Old Saturn. It continues to form through the
   unconscious work of the human I on the astral body. It is a transformed
   part of the astral body. This twilight unconscious work on the astral
   body began in Lemurian times and reached its climax in the
   Egyptian-Chaldean culture. The sentient soul is born as an independent
   element at the age of 21. Aristotle referred to the sentient soul as
   the orectikon. In the Hebrew tradition it is called Nephesh.

   The intellectual or mind soul was predisposed when the Earth was
   condensed to the state of air in the polar age. It represents a
   modification of the astral body, which is further formed by the I
   working unconsciously on the etheric body and the result of this
   activity being reflected back into the astral body. This work began in
   the Atlantean period and reached its climax in the Greco-Latin culture.
   Aristotle called the intellectual or mind soul the kineticon. In the
   Hebrew tradition it is called Ruach. As an independent element, the
   mind soul is born at the age of 28. In the intellectual soul, the I
   appears to us for the first time, but it does not yet become clearly
   aware of itself. This only happens through the consciousness soul.

   The consciousness soul is also a transformed part of the astral body.
   Its first disposition was created when during the hyperborean age - a
   short repetition of the Old Sun - the Earth condensed to the state of
   water. It is formed further by the fact that the I unconsciously works
   on the physical body, reshaping it, and this activity is reflected back
   into the astral body. This unconscious work of the I began at the end
   of the Atlantean era and is striving towards a climax in our present
   cultural epoch. The consciousness soul is born as an independent
   element at the age of 35. Aristotle used the term dianoetikon for the
   consciousness soul. In the Hebrew tradition it is called Neshama.

   In the Zohar, the holy book of Kabbalah, this trinity of soul members
   is described in its fundamental meaning thus:

   „And behold, when the All-Holy One created man, He read his substance
   from the four sides of the world, placed man himself in the place of
   the lower sanctuary, and drew to him the soul of life from the upper
   sanctuary. And the soul is grouped into three levels, which is why it
   has three names, according to the upper secret: Nephesh, Ruach,
   Neshama. Nephesh the lower level. Ruach is the substance that rules
   over the soul, existing in all things in the right way. Neshama, the
   higher substance, ruling over everything - holy, upper level. These
   three levels are combined in man, in those who are worthy to serve
   their Lord. For in the beginning there is in him the Nephesh, and that
   is the holy judgment, that in it man may change to the right. When a
   man reaches purification on this level, he can ennoble himself by
   ascending to "Ruach", for this is the holy level that rests above
   Nephesh, so that with it the man who has become worthy may ennoble
   himself. But if he has ascended in Nephesh and Ruach and has changed to
   the right in the service of his Lord, then Neshama, the upper, holy
   level that rules over all, rules over him, so that he may beautify
   himself with the upper, holy level - thus he becomes all-perfect,
   perfect on all sides, in order to become worthy of the world to come,
   as one who loves God.“ (Lit.: Zohar, p. 127f)

Old and young souls

   „You know from the description in my "Occult Science in Outline" that
   during the Lemurian period of earth evolution only very few human
   beings survived, so to speak, the events of earth evolution on earth
   itself, that only a few remained on earth during the Lemurian period;
   that the majority of souls, before the actual danger of the
   mummification of all human beings began, rose from the earth to other
   planets and continued to live on Mars, Saturn, Venus, Jupiter and so
   on; that then, from the end of the Lemurian period and during the
   Atlantean period, these souls gradually descended again to the earth in
   order to embody themselves in earthly bodies under the changed earthly
   conditions and to appear in ever new incarnations. So we have souls who
   came down from the planetary world relatively early, and others who
   descended late, only in the late periods of the Atlantean evolution.
   The former souls, who descended earlier, have had more incarnations
   within the Earth than those who descended later, and these we can
   therefore call younger souls, in contrast to the former, souls which
   have absorbed less.

   An old soul was the individuality hidden behind the name Gilgamesh, and
   a younger one embodied in Eabani at the starting point of Babylonian
   culture. Yes, in relation to this younger or older of the human souls
   something very strange is revealed - one might almost say even to the
   surprise of the occultist. If, for example, anyone today has come so
   far as to admit a little of the truths of spiritual science, but
   otherwise still clings to the prejudices and value judgements of the
   outer world, then it will seem plausible to him that, for example,
   philosopher or scholar souls of our day must be reckoned among the
   older souls. Occult research shows the exact opposite, strange as it
   may sound, and it is surprising to the occultist himself that in Kant,
   for example, a young soul lived. Yes, the facts say so, there is
   nothing to be done about it. And one could point out that the younger
   souls embody themselves in the majority in the coloured races, and that
   the coloured races, especially the Negro race, prefer to embody younger
   souls. But it is precisely the peculiarity of the human way of
   thinking, which lives itself out in scholarship, in the materialistic
   science of today, that conditions younger souls. And it is even
   demonstrable that in the case of many a personality, in which one would
   not at all presuppose it, the previous incarnation is by all means with
   the savages. Yes, that again is what the facts say! All this must be
   noted, it is so. Of course, this does not take anything away from the
   importance or value of the judgements we make about our environment;
   nevertheless, it must be grasped in order to gain an overall
   understanding of what we are dealing with. In this sense we have to do
   with Eabani in ancient Babylonia with a young soul, in Gilgamesh with
   an old soul. Such an old soul, according to its whole nature, will
   grasp early on what is, so to speak, not only a cultural element, a
   cultural factor of the present, but what falls into the present as a
   cultural impact and lets us look far out into the perspective of the
   future.“ (Lit.:GA 126, p. 34f)

The fate of the soul after death

   [330px-Rohrbach_Altar_Allerseelen_2_Altarbild_Arme_Seelen.jpg] Rohrbach
   parish church. Altar of All Souls (1700) - Altarpiece: Poor Souls in
   Purgatory.
   → See also: Life between death and new birth and Kamaloka

   Immediately after death, the human being initially experiences a
   comprehensive life panorama for about two to three days, which places
   his past earthly life in simultaneity before his consciousness. During
   this short time, which is experienced as blissful, his etheric body
   disperses to a small remnant in the world ether. Only then does the
   dead person enter the state of kamaloka, which comprises the 3 or 4
   lower parts of the soul world (astral world), in which the human being
   must give up those desires which could only be satisfied by means of
   the physical body which is given up with death and which still bind him
   to the past earthly life. A large part of the astral body is discarded
   here and merges into the general astral world. In the kamaloka, man
   encounters the spiritual-cosmic forces of the ]]lunar sphere]].

   „The first time after death - as has already been said - is actually
   filled for the human being with a kind of connection with the last life
   on earth. It is a kind of growing out of the last earthly life, so that
   in fact in these first times after death everything continues that has
   taken hold of the human astral body in earthly life. What occupied this
   human astral body, the nature of the affects, the nature of the
   passions, the nature of the feelings, continues. And because the human
   being here in physical embodiment consciously experiences all these
   things only when he is within his physical body, the experience of all
   these forces in the astral body is of course essentially different when
   the human being passes through the region that lies between death and a
   new birth. In normal cases - and there are many exceptions - this
   experience is essentially permeated in the first times after death by a
   certain deprivation, caused by the fact that the human being has to
   live in his astral body without the physical body being at his
   disposal. Man longs to still have his physical body; this keeps him in
   the sphere of the earth for a shorter or longer time - one may call it
   that - in the normal case. All kamaloka actually runs in the sphere
   between the earth and the lunar orbit; but the actual kamaloka which is
   significant for man runs much nearer the earth than, let us say, the
   lunar orbit.“ (Lit.:GA 140, p. 266f)

   In some cases the dead are bound to the earthly sphere longer than
   usual. Often this experience, which is difficult for the deceased to
   bear, is caused by the fact that the person has neglected to form
   concepts and ideas during earthly life that extend beyond earthly
   existence. However, it can also be worries for friends, relatives and
   children left behind or unfulfilled tasks that tie the dead person to
   earthly existence for a long time. One can then help the dead by taking
   over their tasks and duties. For the earth itself and for the people
   left behind here, the earth-bound dead pose a great problem, for "much
   of the destructive forces at work within the earth sphere come from
   such dead people banished to this earth sphere." (Lit.:GA 182, p. 20)
   → See also: Earth-bound dead

I-consciousness in earthly life and after death

   → See also: I-consciousness

   The memory of the physical body, which arises as a thought when the
   body dissolves, enables us to have I-consciousness after death. The
   moment of death is of special significance here, when the physical body
   is discarded in an instant and thereby a tremendous light of
   consciousness flares up, which, however, because it is so bright and
   dazzling, man is only gradually able to grasp. Here it is only
   continued on a large scale what was already the case on a small scale
   during life on earth, for even then the I-consciousness was based on
   small processes of destruction in the physical body.

   „Self-consciousness, which is summed up in the "I", rises out of
   consciousness. This arises when the spiritual enters into the human
   being through the forces of the physical and etheric bodies breaking
   them down. In the degradation of these bodies the soil is created on
   which the consciousness unfolds its life. But if the organisation is
   not to be destroyed, the decomposition must be followed by a
   reconstruction. Thus, when a degradation has taken place for an
   experience of consciousness, precisely what has been degraded will be
   rebuilt. In the perception of this reconstruction lies the experience
   of self-consciousness. One can follow this process in inner vision. One
   can feel how the conscious is transformed into the self-conscious by
   creating from oneself an imitation of the merely conscious. The merely
   conscious has its image in that part of the organism which has become
   empty through degradation. It has moved into self-consciousness when
   the emptiness has been filled again from within. The beingness that is
   capable of this fulfilment is experienced as 'I'.“ (Lit.:GA 26, p. 19f)

   „In death the physical body dissolves into earth matter. Now this is
   significant. When we sleep, the desire to return to the physical body
   lives in us constantly - I have already mentioned this several times.
   This desire dominates us from the moment we fall asleep until the
   moment we wake up; in a way, we long for the physical body again. If we
   have discarded it in death, then we cannot long to return to it, we
   cannot press ourselves back into it. But from this it follows that we
   cannot develop this desire to return to the physical body. This desire,
   which we have from the time we fall asleep until we wake up, is now
   gone. Something else takes the place of this desire. It is replaced by
   the thought of our physical body that arises in our astral body and
   especially in our I. We now look at our physical body. It lives in our
   consciousness. It becomes a content of our consciousness. And the
   dissolution of our physical body into its elements causes us to carry
   the consciousness of our physical body through the time that passes
   between death and a new birth. Through this, however, we know
   ourselves, as it were, remembering our physical body, as an I the whole
   time between death and a new birth. Thus the knowledge of the physical
   body takes the place of the possession of the physical body. A state of
   consciousness, an appearance of consciousness takes its place. This
   whole feeling of the physical body, which we have from birth to death,
   is replaced after death by the consciousness of our physical body. And
   through this consciousness, that is, through a purely spiritual state,
   we are further sufficiently connected with life on earth.“ (Lit.:GA
   163, p. 125)

Immortality of the soul

   [330px-Madonna_on_the_crescent_Spain_17c.jpg] Praying Madonna on the
   Crescent Moon, Spain, 17th century (anonymous)

   The immortality of the soul does not consist simply in the survival of
   what we know as the empirical life of the soul - called "mind" in
   English - from earthly existence, for this is largely tied to the
   activity of our physical organistation.

   „Those who have thought about the immortality of the soul have always
   thought as about something that is in ordinary life and passes through
   the gate of death; whereas that which passes through the gate of death
   must first be sought, for it lies so deeply hidden in the soul that it
   is not even noticed, that attention is not directed to it in ordinary
   life; but it is there nevertheless. And when he who thus really, as it
   were chemically, separates the spiritual-soul from the bodily, when he
   then experiences this spiritual-soul as it is concealed in a
   supersensible world of spiritual beings standing above him, then he
   also knows that in this soul which is concealed in ordinary life - just
   as hydrogen is concealed in water - he has in it something which works
   quite secretly, as it were between the lines of life; which absorbs
   into itself the finest forces of the soul, of experience, of the moral
   faculties of man, just as the little plant germ absorbs the forces from
   the whole plant in order to concentrate them. And just as after the
   withering, after the leaves wither and the blossom dies, the plant
   carries over as a little germ that which lived in the previous plant
   into the following plant, that which the plant has saved over as a
   germ, - so it is in the human soul. When you distil it in this way, you
   realise that in every moment of life, awake and asleep, this human soul
   is constantly working in the subsoil of everyday life, working out all
   the abilities we acquire, being penetrated, deeply penetrated, by what
   it has done wrong and right, beautiful and ugly; it carries this within
   itself, just as the plant germ carries within itself the germ of the
   whole new plant. And then one knows that what lives so hidden in the
   soul goes through a life between death and new birth - and again
   returns to earth life. In the life between death and a new birth, the
   human being gathers forces from a spiritual world, but these forces
   become formative forces, so that through a new birth he can unite with
   what is given to him by father and mother, by the ancestral line. Thus
   the human soul does not live through one earth-life, but through
   successive earth-lives.“ (Lit.:GA 64, p. 342f)

   Above all, however, the immortality of the soul is not something that
   is given to man from the outset and cannot be lost, but something that
   he must actively acquire and likewise actively preserve.

   „Inner activity, inner active involvement with what man makes of
   himself, even what he makes of himself as an immortal being, that is
   necessary. Man must work at his immortality. That is what most people
   would like to have conjured away. They believe that knowledge can only
   teach us something of what we already know, that we are immortal [...]

   That is basically the Christian teaching. Therefore, man should not
   merely have faith in Christ, as a newer confession would have it, but
   he should consider Paul's words: "Not I, but the Christ in me." The
   power of Christ in me, it must want to be developed and it must be
   trained! Faith as such cannot save a person, but only the inner
   cooperation with the Christ, the inner working out of the power of the
   Christ, which is always there if one wants to work it out, but which
   must be worked out. Initiative, activity, that is what humanity will
   have to fulfil itself with. And it will have to realise that mere
   passive faith simply makes it too easy for man, so that immortality
   would gradually die on earth. This is the endeavour of Ahriman.“
   (Lit.:GA 205, p. 186f)

   „Plato's "Phaidon" wants nothing other than eternity of the soul. He
   does not want to prove eternity of the soul. It is not a matter of
   logical proof. His aim is to bring to life what is gathered around
   Socrates and to bring it into a new world. The soul is to rise by
   turning away from what can be seen with eyes and heard with ears. In
   short, eternity is to be something that one acquires, that one acquires
   through initiation into the mysteries. Plato's disciple says: The soul
   can become immortal if it rises to the vision of eternity. When it sees
   the spiritual, it participates in spiritual life. In this way it
   becomes eternal. This is a process of development that we went through
   in the Platonic "Phaidon", also a process of development that we see in
   the "Symposium" [...]

   That is the basic element that runs through the Platonic "Phaidon".
   Plato says: You can see what you want, but if you only perceive what
   your eyes, ears and external senses give you, then you cannot come to
   the spiritual. The super-sensible is what guarantees you eternity of
   the soul. - He could not have the eternity of the soul proved. The
   disciples should acquire it, they should become immortal. That is the
   basic conception of the Platonic method.“ (Lit.: Rudolf Steiner
   1901/1902, 12th lecture, pdf)

   Up to the time of the Mystery of Golgotha, people had an inner
   knowledge of their true self, albeit without a distinct
   I-consciousness. The more the body-bound I-consciousness came to the
   fore, the more this knowledge was lost. What the human being
   consciously carried as a soul in his earthly life was thus increasingly
   subject to mortality. This is also indicated in Paul's Epistle to the
   Colossians (Col 3:3–4). Only through conscious union with the Christ
   can the soul be saved from sharing the fate of the perishable body.
   Rudolf Steiner spoke about this in detail in his lectures at the
   foundation of the Christian Community:

   „Above all, it is a question of your being able to place before your
   souls in the right way that which is expressed as the mystery of
   Christianity in the third part of the Letter to the Colossians in the
   third verse. I would like to call this passage before your souls today
   in the way it is really meant:

   You have died, and your I is separated from you and
   united with Christ in the spirit world; but if Christ,
   who bears your I, has himself come before the vision,
   then you too will reveal yourselves with him.

   A tremendous depth is hidden in this word. It is actually spoken almost
   for later times than for the time of the apostles. It is actually
   spoken for our time, so that our time understands it in the right way.
   For it is so, that in the earthly development of mankind up to about
   the time of the Mystery of Golgotha, men experienced in their inner
   being that which could be of their [true] self in this inner being.
   With what they experienced in their inner being, they experienced at
   the same time something real of what lived in them in the pre-earthly
   existence. One could not have said to these people: Become aware of
   your eternal spiritual-soul core through something! because they simply
   had states of consciousness in which this eternal spiritual-soul core
   shone forth. They only needed self-knowledge, just as people today have
   sense-awareness; and in looking at their self they perceived - without
   that clear I-consciousness which only developed later - their pre-natal
   and their after-death. And so they could understand when the initiates
   spoke to them: Your body dies, but what you experience in your inner
   being you know does not die with you; it is alive, it remains alive. -
   Death did not yet have an instrument to kill the human soul.

   But what put the apostle in a different position was that the souls had
   begun, around the time of the Mystery of Golgotha, to participate in
   the destinies of the body, and that the souls [since that time] have
   been in danger of sharing the destinies of the body. In ancient times,
   the soul did not share the fate of the body. Part of the fate of the
   body is dying, and the soul had not died with it. That was the very
   concrete conception in ancient times. This fact was later abstracted
   because people could not bear it in all its intensity. People did not
   want to admit to themselves that what had developed between birth and
   death under the continual pressing forth of the I-consciousness no
   longer had a share in the eternal core of the soul of man, but had a
   share in the body and participated in the fate of the body, that it
   therefore died with it. This was clear above all to the first
   Christians that the time had come in earthly development when the soul
   was endowed with the I on earth, but thereby died with the body. That
   the body dies was not what was said in the first proclamations of the
   Gospels, but that the soul dies, and that it has already died in the
   human beings who emerged from the pre-Christian development of the
   world. It was meant as a real word: You have died. - Not the earlier
   souls had died, for then they had not yet participated in the fate of
   the body, but you belong to the fate of the generation of those who
   have died, that is, your souls participate in the fate of the body; for
   what you carry here as an I-consciousness through your physical body is
   only a reflection of your true self. - Before the Mystery of Golgotha,
   one did not know anything of this true I when one looked into one's own
   self, but it was not yet separated from the human being. At the time of
   the Mystery of Golgotha it was separated from the human being, and the
   human being was lifted up into the spiritual world, and only the
   reflection of the I remains here below as I-consciousness.

   If we imagine what man experienced before the Mystery of Golgotha, he
   then had his soul, in which he experienced the pre-birth, and he had
   the real I, which he did not perceive at first. After the Mystery of
   Golgotha, man had his soul, but he no longer experienced the pre-birth
   in it. Since that time his true self has been a spiritual one, that is,
   it does not belong to the earthly world but to the spiritual world, and
   he has the reflection of this self through the physical body, the
   self-consciousness: "... and your self is separated from you and united
   with Christ in the spirit world."

   He has now descended to earth, so that this spiritual world can
   penetrate the earthly world through him. But man's true self does not
   live in the world which can be seen with the eyes and which can be
   approached with the three ordinary faculties, thinking, feeling and
   willing; it lives in a world which since that time has penetrated the
   earthly one, but it is united with the Christ. And one can only know of
   the true I by knowing at the same time of the Christ; one can only feel
   the true I when one feels at the same time the essence of the Christ
   and the essence of the Mystery of Golgotha; the true I can only carry
   one through when one feels at the same time carried through by that
   impulse which proceeds from the Mystery of Golgotha.“ (Lit.:GA 344, p.
   117ff)
   [500px-Apocalypse_vasnetsov.jpg] Viktor Mikhailovich Vasnetsov: The
   Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse (1887)

   The fact that the awareness of the mortality of the body-bound soul
   first appeared in the Greco-Latin period is pointed out in the
   Apocalypse of John at the opening of the fourth seal:

   „We perceive ... how at the opening of the fourth seal, which therefore
   corresponds to a mystery of the fourth post-Atlantean epoch, a pale
   horse appears, and how now there is talk of death which has come into
   the world (Acts 6:8). This touches on one of the most important
   mysteries of the Apocalypse, insofar as this mystery is particularly
   important for our time. In the fourth post-Atlantean epoch, in a
   certain sense, death really enters humanity. Just realise this. You
   learn to recognise human nature well by looking at something like death
   [...]

   This was what occurred in the fourth post-Atlantean epoch, precisely in
   the epoch that coincided with the Mystery of Golgotha, that man saw his
   earthly life clearly enclosed, so to speak, by the two gates: the gate
   of birth or conception and the gate of death.

   This consciousness, this kind of constitution of the soul, really only
   came into being in the fourth post-Atlantean epoch, so that we have to
   do with the unfolding of this consciousness that man is strictly
   enclosed within the limits of earthly life, approximately from the
   eighth century before Christ until the fifteenth century after the
   Mystery of Golgotha. Since that time, a new consciousness has been
   preparing itself, but we are only at the beginning.“ (Lit.:GA 346, p.
   74ff)

   The words Achilles speaks to Odysseus, who has descended into the
   underworld, are also to be interpreted in this sense:

     „Praise me not now death, glorious Odysseus.
     I would rather be the unfortunate vassal,
     Who lives but meagrely, as a day labourer to build the field,
     Than rule the whole crowd of mouldering dead.“

   – Homer: Odyssey 11,488-491

   Rudolf Steiner remarks:

   „The fourth culture, the Greco-Roman, it leads man completely down to
   the physical plane. He has now become so fond of it that he has
   completely forgotten where he came from. He has lost his understanding
   of the spiritual world. This is deeply illustrated by the saying of the
   Greek hero Achilles: "Better a beggar in the upper world than a king in
   the kingdom of shadows.“ (Lit.:GA 109, p. 246f)

Personal immortality

   Personal immortality - the consciousness of personality that lasts
   beyond death - was only achieved by man through the consciousness soul.

   „In Spain, the Moorish scholars, above all such a personality as
   Averroes, taught how intelligence rules everywhere, how the whole
   world, the cosmos, is filled with the all-governing intelligence. The
   people down on earth, they have different qualities, but they do not
   have their own personal intelligence. But every time a human being
   works on earth, a drop of intelligence, a ray of intelligence goes out
   from the general intelligence, sinks, as it were, into the head, into
   the body of the human being, fills him, so that when a human being
   walks about on earth, he has something like a kind of part of the quite
   general cosmic intelligence. When man then dies, he passes through the
   gate of death, then what he has had as intelligence goes back into the
   general intelligence, flows back.
   Plate 9 Plate 9

   So that what the human being has in thoughts, concepts, ideas during
   life between birth and death flows back into the general reservoir of
   general intelligence and one cannot speak of that which the human being
   carries as particularly valuable in his soul, his intelligence, being
   subject to a personal immortality.

   The Spanish-Moorish scholars also taught that man does not have
   personal immortality. He lives on, but the most important thing about
   him - so the scholars said - is that he can develop intelligent
   knowledge during his life. But that does not go along with his being.
   So you cannot say that the intelligent being has a personal
   immortality. You see, this was, I would say, the furore of the struggle
   of the scholastics among the Dominicans, the furore to assert the
   personal immortality of man. In those days it could not have occurred
   in any other way than that these Dominicans asserted: Man is personally
   immortal, and what Averroes teaches is heresy. We have to say that
   differently today. But for that time it is understandable that a person
   who did not accept personal immortality, like Averroes in Spain, was
   declared a heretic. Today we have to look at the matter according to
   reality, according to reality. We must say: In the sense in which man
   has become immortal according to his consciousness soul, he has only
   acquired this immortality - this continuing consciousness of
   personality - after he had passed through the gate of death, since the
   time when a consciousness soul takes hold in the earthly man. So if you
   had asked Aristotle or Alexander what they thought about immortality,
   how would they have answered? Words do not matter, but if they had been
   asked and if they had answered in Christian terminology, they would
   have said: Our soul is taken up by Michael, and we live on in the
   community of Michael. - Or they would have expressed it cosmologically;
   just out of such a communion as that of Alexander or Aristotle was, one
   would have said cosmologically, and one has also said it: the soul of
   man is intelligent on earth, but this intelligence is a drop from the
   fullness of that which Michael pours out like an intelligent rain which
   overflows men. And this rain emanates from the sun, the sun in turn
   takes back into its own being the soul of man, and the soul of man,
   which exists there between birth and death, it radiates down from the
   sun to the earth. Michael's rule would have been sought on the sun.
   This would have been the cosmological answer.“ (Lit.:GA 237, p. 163ff)

   The Hebrew doctrine of the soul already knows a corresponding
   differentiation by distinguishing between nephesh (Hebrew: נפש;
   sentient soul), ruach (Hebrew: רוח; intellectual soul) and neshama
   (Hebrew: נשמה; consciousness soul). The lower soul members nephesh and
   ruach are mortal and dissolve after death. Neshama is the living
   breath, the "breath of life" that Yahweh-Elohim blows into man (Genesis
   2:7) and in Genesis denotes the consciousness soul, especially in its
   fusion with the spirit self. In this way, it is the immortal part of
   the soul that resides in the body during the earthly incarnation, but
   is not therefore bound to the body.

   == Soul death

   Soul death, the dying off or complete dissolution of the soul,
   threatens those people who fill their souls only with earthly transient
   knowledge during their life on earth. They will be hit particularly
   hard by the second death at the time of the Last Judgement, when not
   only the physical body but also the etheric body in its form
   corresponding to earthly development will finally be laid aside,
   because they do not have the necessary soul substance through which
   they can continue their further development on the New Jupiter - the
   New Jerusalem from the Apocalypse of John. Only those who have filled
   their astral body with the Christ Being will pass the second death
   unnoticed.

Descent of the souls

   „All souls are descended from Christ, and such a time will come when
   souls will become aware of this, and when they will understand that
   even the equalisation among souls can only take place through the
   Christ.“ (Lit.:GA 266c, p. 48)

   (Record C)

   „In the primordial beginning there was a soul substance which then
   divided itself into innumerable differentiated individual souls;
   through this differentiation karma arose, which exists in soul
   connections from person to person. In the time before the event of
   Palestine, these karmic connections lived out in the blood
   relationship, were bound to the blood. But precisely at the time of the
   Mystery of Golgotha, this soul substance gradually dried up, and men
   would have passed soullessly over the earth at the end of the earth's
   development, would have lapsed into animalism in human bodies which
   would be the caricatures of animal bodies; and the I (for it is not the
   I that dies out, karma is bound to this until the end) would be empty
   and soulless if the Mystery of Golgotha had not taken place. The Christ
   is the spiritual progenitor of the present humanity, as Adam is in
   relation to the body, and only by filling ourselves with the
   Christ-substance, the Christ-impulse, do we escape soullessness, and we
   do this by absorbing the knowledge of the Mystery of Golgotha and
   letting it live in us. More and more soulful then become the
   relationships and the living together of man and man.“ (Lit.:GA 266c,
   p. 48f)

   (Record D)

Literature

     * Ernst Pöppel (Hrsg.): Gehirn und Bewusstsein, Wiley Verlag Chemie
       1989, ISBN 978-3527279012
     * Richard Heinzmann: Anima unica forma corporis. Thomas von Aquin als
       Überwinder des platonisch-neuplatonischen Dualismus. in
       Philosophisches Jahrbuch, 93. Jahrgang, Verlag Karl Alber,
       Freiburg/München 1986, S. 236f. pdf
     * George Karamanolis: Seele und Seelenwanderung academia.edu
     * George Karamanolis: Arten von Unsterblichkeit in der antiken
       Philosophie, Universität Wien 2014 academia.edu
     * Peter Heusser, Peter Selg: Das Leib-Seele-Problem: Zur Entwicklung
       eines geistgemäßen Menschenbildes in der Medizin des 20.
       Jahrhunderts, Verlag des Ita Wegman Instituts 2011, ISBN
       978-3905919295
     * Matthias Beck: Das Geistkonzept des Thomas von Aquin - Seine
       Rezeption in moderner Theologie und seine Relevanz für Medizin und
       Genetik, in: Johannes Weinzirl (Hrsg.), Peter Heusser (Hrsg.): Was
       ist Geist?, Wittener Kolloquium für Humanismus, Medizin und
       Philosophie, Band 2, Königshausen u. Neumann 2014, ISBN
       978-3826052224, S. 137 - 174
     * Aristoteles, Klaus Corcilius (Hrsg., Übers.): Über die Seele. De
       anima, 1. Auflage, Meiner 2017, ISBN 978-3787327898
     * Der Sohar. Das heilige Buch der Kabbala, aus dem Hebräischen
       übertragen und herausgegeben von Ernst Müller, Diederichs Gelbe
       Reihe, Heinrich Hugendubel Verlag, Kreuzlingen/München 2005, ISBN
       3-7205-2643-7
     * Rudolf Steiner: Das Christentum als mystische Tatsache, 24
       Vorträge, gehalten in Berlin vom 19. Oktober 1901 - 26. April 1902,
       nicht veröffentlicht in der GA.
     * Rudolf Steiner: Theosophie, GA 9 (2002), Kapitel Die seelische
       Wesenheit des Menschen, ISBN 3-7274-0090-0 English: rsarchive.org
       German: pdf pdf(2) html mobi epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Metamorphosen des Seelenlebens – Pfade der
       Seelenerlebnisse. Erster Teil, GA 58 (1984), ISBN 3-7274-0585-6
       English: rsarchive.org German: pdf pdf(2) html mobi epub
       archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Antworten der Geisteswissenschaft auf die großen
       Fragen des Daseins, GA 60 (1983), ISBN 3-7274-0600-3 English:
       rsarchive.org German: pdf pdf(2) html mobi epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Aus schicksaltragender Zeit, GA 64 (1959), ISBN
       3-7274-0640-2 English: rsarchive.org German: pdf pdf(2) html mobi
       epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Die Apokalypse des Johannes, GA 104 (1985), ISBN
       3-7274-1040-X English: rsarchive.org German: pdf pdf(2) html mobi
       epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Das Prinzip der spirituellen Ökonomie im
       Zusammenhang mit Wiederverkörperungsfragen, GA 109 (2000), ISBN
       3-7274-1090-6 English: rsarchive.org German: pdf pdf(2) html mobi
       epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Okkulte Geschichte, GA 126 (1992), ISBN
       3-7274-1261-5 English: rsarchive.org German: pdf pdf(2) html mobi
       epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Okkulte Untersuchungen über das Leben zwischen Tod
       und neuer Geburt, GA 140 (1961) English: rsarchive.org German: pdf
       pdf(2) html mobi epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Zufall, Notwendigkeit und Vorsehung , GA 163
       (1986), ISBN 3-7274-1630-0 English: rsarchive.org German: pdf
       pdf(2) html mobi epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Der Tod als Lebenswandlung, GA 182 (1996), ISBN
       3-7274-1820-6 English: rsarchive.org German: pdf pdf(2) html mobi
       epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Menschenwerden, Weltenseele und Weltengeist –
       Erster Teil, GA 205 (1987), ISBN 3-7274-2050-2 English:
       rsarchive.org German: pdf pdf(2) html mobi epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Esoterische Betrachtungen karmischer Zusammenhänge.
       Dritter Band, GA 237 (1991), ISBN 3-7274-2370-6 English:
       rsarchive.org German: pdf pdf(2) html mobi epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Aus den Inhalten der esoterischen Stunden, Band
       III: 1913 und 1914; 1920 – 1923, GA 266/3 (1998), ISBN
       3-7274-2663-2 English: rsarchive.org German: pdf pdf(2) html mobi
       epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Vorträge und Kurse über christlich-religiöses
       Wirken, III, GA 344 (1994), ISBN 3-7274-3440-6 English:
       rsarchive.org German: pdf pdf(2) html mobi epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner: Vorträge und Kurse über christlich-religiöses
       Wirken, V, GA 346 (2001), ISBN 3-7274-3460-0 English: rsarchive.org
       German: pdf pdf(2) html mobi epub archive.org
     * Rudolf Steiner, Harald Haas (Hrsg.): Grenzerlebnisse der Seele:
       Schreck, Scham, Zweifel und schreckvollste Verwirrung
       (Thementexte), Rudolf Steiner Verlag, Dornach 2016, ISBN
       978-3727454158

   [90px-Steiner_big.jpg]
   References to the work of Rudolf Steiner follow Rudolf Steiner's
   Collected Works (CW or GA), Rudolf Steiner Verlag, Dornach/Switzerland,
   unless otherwise stated.
   Email: verlag@steinerverlag.com URL: www.steinerverlag.com.
   Index to the Complete Works of Rudolf Steiner - Aelzina Books
   A complete list by Volume Number and a full list of known English
   translations you may also find at Rudolf Steiner's Collected Works
   Rudolf Steiner Archive - The largest online collection of Rudolf
   Steiner's books, lectures and articles in English.
   Rudolf Steiner Audio - Recorded and Read by Dale Brunsvold
   steinerbooks.org - Anthroposophic Press Inc. (USA)
   Rudolf Steiner Handbook - Christian Karl's proven standard work for
   orientation in Rudolf Steiner's Collected Works for free download as
   PDF.

References

    1. ↑ Epiphanius: Panarion XXV 48
    2. ↑ Cf. the Principle of Spiritual Economy
    3. ↑ Gorgias 493a2-3
    4. ↑ In this context, the parable of the rich man and poor Lazarus
       handed down in the Gospel of Luke is noteworthy, insofar as it is
       one of the few biblical passages that gives a concrete idea of the
       existence of the dead in Sheol, the underworld, and the souls are
       drawn here in a thoroughly corporeal form and not as bodiless free
       souls. They appear as concrete human beings who can see and hear,
       suffer pain or feel joy. Even in early Christianity, this parable
       was therefore often used as an argument against the Platonic
       doctrine of the soul and the gnosis that followed it, which saw the
       redemption of the soul precisely in its bodily-free existence.
       Accordingly, Tertullian († c. 220) already characterised the soul
       thus:

     „So we describe the soul as arising from God's breath, immortal,
     consubstantial, corporeal, of form capable of image, simple in
     substance, sentient through itself, progressing in various ways,
     free-willed, subject to contingencies, of changing mental direction
     and disposition, rational, ruling, endowed with foreboding, and
     arising from a soul.“
       – Tertullian: On the Soul (De anima), Cap. 22online
       In the following chapters, Tertullian describes in great detail how
       the soul is generated at the same time as the body at conception,
       in that the divine breath once received by Adam is passed on from
       generation to generation (see De anima 27).
    5. ↑ see also: Richard Heinzmann: Anima unica forma corporis - Thomas
       von Aquin als Überwinder des platonisch-neuplatonischen Dualismus
       in Philosophisches Jahrbuch, 93rd volume, Verlag Karl Alber,
       Freiburg/München 1986, p. 236ff
    6. ↑ "The soul separated from the body is a single substance of
       rational nature existing for itself. It is not, however, 'person'."
       (Sum of Theology I 29,1,V)
    7. ↑ in the body, but not through the body

   Retrieved from "https://en.anthro.wiki/index.php?title=Soul&oldid=8600"
   Categories:
     * Members
     * Soul
     * Pages using ISBN magic links

   [anthrowiki.png]

Navigation

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Pages from A-Z
     * Categories from A-Z
     * Search
     * Recent changes
     * Random page
     * Donate
     * Help
     * Contact us

See also

     * Newsletter
     * anthro.world
     * biodyn.wiki

Wiki tools

Wiki tools

     * Special pages
     * Cite this page

Page tools

Page tools

User page tools

More

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Printable version
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Page logs

Other projects

In other languages

     * Deutsch

Categories

Categories

     * Members
     * Soul
     * Pages using ISBN magic links

     * ''Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC
       BY-NC-SA 4.0)''
     * Powered by MediaWiki

     * This page was last edited on 6 December 2021, at 16:49.
     * Content is available under ''Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike
       4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0)'' unless otherwise noted.
     * This page has been accessed 48,707 times.

     * Privacy policy
     * About AnthroWiki
     * Disclaimers
