   Skip to main content

   Home
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
     * About us
     * Anthology (BUTTON) Toggle submenu
          + On the Unity of Knowledge
          + Philosophical Dimensions of Science
          + Contemporary Scientists on Science and Religion
          + Technology, Progress and Ethics
          + On Copernicanism and the Galileo Affair
          + Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Cosmic and Human Evolution
          + On Faith and Reason
          + From the Catholic Church Magisterium
          + Teachings from John Paul II
          + Institutions related to the Catholic Church
          + Ancient Authors and Fathers of the Church
          + Authors from the Middle Ages
          + Thomas Aquinas
          + Thinkers of the Modern Age
     * Encyclopedia
     * Special Issues
     * Websites on Science & Religion

Mobile

     * About us
     * Anthology
          + On the Unity of Knowledge
          + Philosophical Dimensions of Science
          + Contemporary Scientists on Science and Religion
          + Technology, Progress and Ethics
          + On Copernicanism and the Galileo Affair
          + Interdisciplinary Perspectives on Cosmic and Human Evolution
          + On Faith and Reason
          + From the Catholic Church Magisterium
          + Teachings from John Paul II
          + Institutions related to the Catholic Church
          + Ancient Authors and Fathers of the Church
          + Authors from the Middle Ages
          + Thomas Aquinas
          + Thinkers of the Modern Age
     * Encyclopedia
     * Special Issues

Breadcrumb

    1. Home

Soul

   DOI
   10.17421/2037-2329-2002-PO-2
   Date
   2002
   Paul O’Callaghan

   I. Introduction - II. Human Soul and the Cosmic Soul in Early Religions
   - III. The Human Soul as an Individual Substance: Plato and Aristotle.
   1. Plato's Understanding of the Soul. 2. Aristotle's Understanding of
   the Soul. - IV.The Human Soul in Sacred Scripture. 1. Terminology. 2.
   "In the Image and Likeness of God" . - V. The Soul in Christian
   Theology, from the Early centuries to the Middle Ages. 1. The Fathers
   of the Church. 2. The Debate on the Nature of the Soul in Mediaeval
   Thought and the Contribution of Thomas Aquinas. - VI. The Human Soul
   and Subjectivity in Modern Philosophy. 1. Radical Dualism and the
   Supremacy of the Soul. 2. The Soul and the Self as a Product of Matter.
   - VII. The Soul in Modern Science: Evolutionism and the Mind-Brain
   Problem. 1. Evolutionism and Hominization. 2. The Mind-Body
   relationship. - VIII. The Human Soul between Theology and Science - IX.
   Concluding Reflections: is the Human Soul an "Action" or a "Substance"?

I. Introduction

   Etymologically the Greek term psyche, "soul", derives, according to
   Plato, from the Greek anapnein, "to breathe," or anapsychon,
   "refreshing" (cf. Cratylus, 399e). Aristotle finds the root of the
   term, besides, in katapsyzis, "cooling" (cf. De Anima, I, 2, 405b), an
   interpretation incidentally used by Origen to describe the primitive
   fall of human spirits in terms of a cooling off of a purely spiritual
   reality (cf. De Principiis, II, 8). Biblical Hebrew's nearest
   equivalent, nefes, is linked directly with the terms "breath" or
   "throat." The Latin term anima (Fr. âme; Sp. alma) derives either from
   the Greek anaigma, "without blood," or more likely from anemos "wind,"
   or "breath." The German form Seele and the English "soul" from the Old
   German saiwolò, is probably of the same origin as the Greek aiolos,
   "mobile," which designates a self-moving principle. The Sanskrit term
   Atman, typical of the Rig-veda, also means breath, and appears in
   modern German as atmen, "to breathe."

   The term "soul," in its different forms and expressions, is to be found
   in virtually every period of history, every civilization, every
   philosophical anthropology, every religious understanding (cf. Eliade,
   1987). It is, then, a concept that crosses human thought and experience
   of all the ages. Nonetheless, philosophers have always been aware of
   the difficulty of speaking about the soul in rigorous terms. Thomas
   Aquinas states that "It is very difficult to know what soul is"
   (cognoscere quid sit anima difficillimum est, De Veritate, q. 10, a. 8,
   ad 8^um), and affirms that to know the soul "requires a proper and
   careful investigation" (requiritur diligens et subtilis inquisitio,
   Summa Theologiae, I, q. 87, a. 1). Two principal yet clearly opposed
   understandings of the human soul are to be found throughout the history
   of philosophy: the so-called "spiritualist" position (Pythagoras,
   Plato, Plotinus, Augustine, Descartes, Leibniz, etc.), and the
   "materialist" understanding (Epicurus, Lucretius, Marx, Comte, Engels,
   etc.). The first draws on a variety of aspects of human life and
   behaviour, usually linked with religion and ethics (self-awareness,
   self-transcendence, freedom, communication, dialogue, culture,
   creativity, etc.), and usually involves a dualistic anthropology. The
   second line is more at home in a strictly scientific and rational
   discourse, and tends towards a monist anthropology. Some authors, such
   as Thomas Aquinas, managed in many ways to synthesise the two
   approaches.

   Scientific discourse in recent centuries has generally become
   circumspect in speaking of the existence and attributes of a human
   "soul," understood as a kind of invisible, immaterial, unifying element
   at the core of the human being. The development of physics, chemistry,
   biochemistry, biology and experimental psychology has witnessed if not
   occasioned a progressive decline in the use of the term, or at best,
   its being reserved for symbolic or poetic usage. In recent decades
   however the tide has been turning again, especially as scientists have
   come to realise the significance and usefulness of the concept in
   studying the so-called "mind-body problem."

II. Human Soul and the Cosmic Soul in Early Religions

   Among primitive peoples the term "soul" is spoken of for the most part
   in cosmological terms, that is within an attempt to understand the
   unity of the universe (cf. Lévy-Bruhl, 1927; Rohde, 1891). However
   contrary to the positions of 19th century authors (cf. Tylor, 1871;
   Zeller, 1883, pp. 30-33), it would seem that Presocratic reflection on
   the human soul is not driven primarily by our understanding of the
   cosmos, but rather by that of the relationship between the Divinity and
   humans (cf. Joël, 1906; Marett, 1929). In other words, primitive
   understandings of the soul are religious and ethical rather than
   cosmological and scientific. That is to say, the Presocratics look on
   the soul not primarily in physical and cosmological terms, but in
   anthropological, intuitive and mystical ones. The notion of "soul" as
   equivalent to "fire" or "breath" is common among many peoples;
   understandably, death ensues and expresses the soul's flight or
   absence. Greek philosophers of the naturalistic school such as
   Diogenes, Anaximander and Anaximines identified the soul with "air"
   and  "breath." For Heraclitus, the soul is subtle and deep, and best
   described in terms of fire. For atomistic materialists such as
   Democritus, Epicurus and the Stoics, the soul is composed of refined
   and mobile atoms, and is mortal at an individual level. Yet it is an
   element of the living organism of the cosmos. The earliest expressions
   of the term are to be found in the writings of Homer (cf. Arbman, 1926;
   Hasenfratz, 1986; Pohlenz, 1947; Porcarelli, 1998; Rohde, 1891). Vital
   human processes such as thought, sentiment, sensation and consciousness
   are attributed by the poet to the tangible thymos. The term is linked
   to notions such as drive, courage, pleasure, fury or impulse, and
   though akin to fumus in Latin, it is commonly translated as animus .
   Conversely, the less frequently used term psyche is commonly reserved
   in Homer to designate life in general, the vital though intangible
   energy which both humans and animals possess impersonally, the cosmic
   power made up of breath, blood, life etc., over which humans exercise
   no dominion. With time, however, the unconscious psyche comes to
   coincide with the sentient thymos and to include the latter's main
   properties: consciousness and spiritual individuality. This fusion
   between breath and consciousness, brought to completion by the Orphics,
   is what made it possible for the Presocratics to speak of the
   transmigration of souls, and as a result of the survival, independence
   and immortality of the human soul, which comes to be considered fully
   itself only when dreaming, or at the moment of death.

   The idea of the individual conscious human soul (Gr. thymos) as the
   direct expression and presence of the "in-forming" power of the common,
   unconscious, cosmic soul (Gr. psyche), relates closely to the doctrine
   of the unitary origin of the world, and points in turn to its primitive
   formation by the gods (Moreau, 1981). This tradition is typical of
   Pythagorism, whose mythology attempts to describe the origins of the
   universe on the basis of numbers which express both synthesis and
   harmony. Pythagorism is taken up by Plato who explains that the
   ordering of the primitive chaos is attributed to a "cosmic soul", which
   is "the most excellent of all things engendered by the best of all
   eternal intelligible beings" (Timaeus, 37ab). The same theory is to be
   found among the Stoics and Neoplatonics, especially in Philo and
   Plotinus, and is often termed "emanationism". According to Plotinus,
   the One gives rise to the Intelligence (Gr. nous), which in turn gives
   rise to the cosmic soul (Gr. psyche), which contains the "seminal
   reasons" of all things. It may be noted that the notion of "cosmic
   soul", as well as the concomitant theories of emanation and pantheism,
   have arisen occasionally in a Christian context. Theodore of Chartres
   and William of Conches, for example, considered that the cosmic soul
   may be identified with the Holy Spirit, an idea also found among
   Neoplatonics. Giordano Bruno took it that it is present as a principle
   of life in all beings. In an idealistic and pantheistic context
   Friedrich Schelling defines the cosmic soul as what sustains the
   continuity of the organic and inorganic world, and unifies nature in a
   single universal organism.

   It is quite clear however that the Judaeo-Christian doctrines of
   creation ex nihilo and the special creation of man would eventually
   come to explain the origin, nature and destiny of the soul in quite
   different terms. The description of the human soul as an emanation of
   the cosmic soul has, in fact, two principal drawbacks. First, it is not
   in a position to express or defend the dignity of the individual human
   being, since just as the individual soul is derived from the cosmic
   soul, humans in their multiplicity of microcosmoi are ontologically
   subordinated to the unitary cosmos in general. Second, drawing as it
   does on a vitalistic, mythological and intuitive epistemology intent on
   explaining the origins and dynamism of the universe, it stands in need
   of more serious rational or scientific verification. Plato and
   Aristotle contributed decisively in this process of clarification.

III. The Human Soul as an Individual Substance: Plato and Aristotle

   Reflection on the existence and origins of the human soul among
   primitive peoples, as we have seen, is cosmological, at least if taken
   from a descriptive standpoint. Nonetheless it is decisively motivated
   by an ethical and religious view of the world, involving individual
   immortality and ethical responsibility. These elements are central in
   the consolidation of the notion of the "substantiality" of the human
   soul, which was one of the principal legacies of the golden age of
   Greek philosophy. The consolidation of a more substantialist
   understanding of the individual human soul took place historically in
   two main directions. First, in a primarily ethical and religious
   context, Plato developed an anthropology of the human composite, body
   and soul, that was decidedly "dualistic" in character: body and soul
   cohabitate as it were, but are at heart antagonistic to one another.
   Second, in a largely rational, empirical and metaphysical context,
   Aristotle developed an understanding of man involving a "substantial
   unity" between body and soul.

   1. Plato's Understanding of the Soul. Plato (427-347 B.C.) received the
   notion of the purification and salvation of the soul from the Orphic
   sects, through Pythagorism. Souls are considered to be of celestial
   origin, particles broken off the infinite Spirit (Gr. pneûma) that
   enter material bodies in order to breathe. Given their heavenly origin,
   souls, if they live upright lives and attain complete purification will
   eventually be reintegrated into their primitive spiritual origin. If
   they live unworthy lives, however, they will be reincarnated as often
   as necessary in the bodies of plants or animals until they have
   undergone full purification. Though certain cosmological elements
   remain in his reflection, Plato's understanding of the soul is situated
   principally in an ethical and religious context. This is confirmed by
   the idea that soul and body are fundamentally antagonistic, and the
   former "enters" the latter as the result of a primitive fall or sin
   (cf. Phaedrus,  248ff; Republic, VII, 514ff).

   Plato attributes four properties to the human soul. a) The soul is the
   "principle of life". While every body moved from without is inanimate,
   every body that moves from within by itself and for itself is animate.
   Every aspect of reality is regulated, as it were, by its own soul. The
   sun, the stars, the earth all have their own (cf. Laws, 898d). b) The
   soul is "immaterial." What is proper to the soul is thought, and by it
   the soul relates to the intelligible world. Significantly Plato rejects
   the theory of Pythagoras (570-490 B.C.), according to whom the soul is
   the simple result of the harmony (Gr. krásis) among the elements
   (Cf. Phaedo, 93b). Moreover, human soul is composed of three parts: the
   rational soul, situated in the brain and destined to direct superior
   human activities; the passional soul, situated in the thorax and source
   of the noble passions; and the concupiscible soul, in the abdomen,
   source of the gross appetites (cf. Republic, 441c). c) The passional
   and concupiscible parts of the soul are mortal, while the rational soul
   is of itself immortal and eternal. "Of all the things man possesses,
   his soul is the closest to the gods, and its properties are most divine
   and true" (Laws, 726a). In the Phaedo, Plato offers a series of reasons
   to account for the soul's immortality: the analogy with the cyclical
   rule of natural things (just as death follows on from life, so also
   life must follow on from death); humans know in the present moment by
   reminiscence or recognition what they once saw in a previous existence
   and this would be impossible were the soul not immortal; the soul, on
   account of its simplicity and affinity to the celestial ideas, is
   immutable and pure, and thus imperishable, whereas the body and
   everything composed corrupts and dissolves (cf. Phaedo, 70-80;
   Republic, 608-611). d) The soul "precedes" the body with which it is
   united in an accidental and not entirely natural way, as a pilot to a
   ship, or a rider to a horse (cf. Phaedo, 246a, 247c). In that sense the
   body is not fully human: man is his soul; man is a soul using a body
   (cf. Alcibiades Major, I, 130a-131a).

   Plato's ideas were taken up frequently throughout the history of
   thought, especially by the Neo-Platonic thinkers Plotinus (205-270) and
   Porphirius (233-305). Plato's understanding of the soul has been
   enormously influential over the centuries for several reasons. It
   expresses a way of thinking in consonance with the basic thrust of many
   other world views, particularly with Oriental ethical and religious
   philosophies (Eliade, 1987), and has the merit of rationally enhancing
   pre-critical and intuitive descriptions of the soul, giving them a
   metaphysical basis. From the ethical and religious standpoint, it
   certainly offers a coherent and enduringly attractive account of the
   origin and nature of the soul. However its drawbacks are not easily
   overcome, mainly because the strictly anthropological and metaphysical
   underpinnings of Platonism are constantly put under strain by its
   inherent dualism and the scarce attention it pays to the human body, to
   matter and the findings of science. Platonism defends the immortality
   and dignity of the human individual, certainly, but the presence of
   humans (of human souls) in the world, and their relationship to the
   cosmos and to other humans remains clearly problematic. It is not
   surprising to find that Plato accords slight value to empirical data in
   general, since the latter draws on the material and corruptible side of
   reality. Understandably, the exact sciences play little or no role in
   the development and consolidation of his doctrine of the human soul
   (cf. Phaedo, 65-67). It is at this point where Aristotle's contribution
   comes in.

   2. Aristotle's Understanding of the Soul. After an early understanding
   of the human soul close to Plato's dualistic vision, and then an
   intermediate period of "vitalist instrumentalism," which holds an
   accidental though not antagonistic union between body and soul (cf.
   Inciarte, 1984; Nuyens, 1973), the definitive position of Aristotle
   (384-322 B.C.) is found in his work De Anima, deeply influenced by his
   scientific findings and cognisant of the psychosomatic unity of the
   human being. Here Aristotle speaks unhesitatingly of a direct union
   between the body and soul, in such a way that the soul is said to be
   the "substantial form" of the body. Of this work Hegel said that "it is
   the best and perhaps the only speculative work on this subject [the
   soul]" (Encyclopedia of Philosophical Sciences, § 378).

   Aristotle begins by affirming that «the soul is that by which in the
   first place we live, feel, move and understand», and adds that "it
   cannot be either without the body, or be a body, because it is not a
   body, but something of the body" (cfr. De Anima, II, 2, 414a). It is
   the first principle of corporal living beings, though distinct from
   matter; it is the source of the body's life. The soul "is the first act
   and the final act (Gr. enteléchia) of the natural body which is in
   potency to life" (De Anima, II, 1, 412a). Thus the soul can be
   considered either as an "entitative principle" which constitutes a
   living organism out of a potentially living body, or as an "operative
   principle," or source and root of all the vital acts of the organism.
   According to Aristotle, there are three kinds of "soul" informing
   matter: the vegetative soul, principle of nutritive, growth and
   reproductive actions; the sensitive soul, origin of knowledge, appetite
   and sensitive movement; and the rational soul, principle of rational
   knowledge and attraction. For him it would be incorrect to say that the
   soul lives, but rather that the entire human being lives in virtue of
   the soul (cf. Metaphysics, VII, 11, 1037a).

   As regards the spirituality and immortality of the soul, Aristotle
   holds that in humans there are intellectual operations which only a
   separated (and therefore incorruptible) substance (Gr. noûs, as opposed
   to sôma) is in a position to accomplish (cf. De Anima, III, 4, 429a-b).
   However, natural "forms" are not separated substances, and must perish
   when the composition of matter and form disintegrates. What happens
   then when humans die? On the basis of Aristotle's writings it is not
   completely clear whether or not the "agent intellect" (which according
   to De generatione animalium, 736b is of divine origin, as well as being
   separate, unmixed and impassive) is present and active as an distinct
   and immortal enteléchia for each human being (cf. Reyna, 1972).

   Doubtless the doctrine of Aristotle, insisting as it does on the
   substantial unity of the human being, attempts to respect empirical
   data to the full. But it does not easily explain how individual human
   beings can acquire any kind of meaningful immortality, nor does it deal
   with the question of human self-consciousness. Even though his earlier
   writings, closer to Plato's, referred to questions of an eschatological
   kind, the fact is that Aristotle spoke little of such issues in later
   works. Understandably, scientifically-inspired monistic or atheistic
   materialisms that question human immortality have commonly drawn on
   Aristotle's writings. Could it be that Socrates was right after all in
   holding that science is simply incompatible with religion (cf. Phaedo,
   65-67), empirical data with the love of wisdom?

   After examining Plato and Aristotle, it should now be clear that our
   understanding of the human soul is significantly conditioned by that of
   the human body, and vice versa. A clear point of conflict is to be
   found in the area of human mortality. For Plato, whose religious ethics
   impel man towards immortality, death is considered a release, an
   unshackling of the soul from the dead weight of matter. For Aristotle,
   whose empirically-based metaphysics ties man to the tangible and
   material world, death seems to involve the destruction of nature and
   the elimination of the individual, though he does not reject the
   possibility of an eschatologically immortal soul (cf. Metaphysics, XII,
   3 1070a). It is precisely in the area of death and immortality that
   Judeo-Christian revelation made its probably most lasting contribution
   to anthropology, and thus to our understanding of the human soul.

IV. The Human Soul in Sacred Scripture

   1. Terminology . Sacred Scripture uses three closely linked Aramaic
   terms when speaking of the human being: basâr, that is, "flesh"
   (translated as sarx in the Greek version of the LXX), nefes, "soul"
   (Gr. psyché), and rûah, "spirit" (Gr. pneûma) (cf. Gundry, 1976; Lys,
   1959; Wolff, 1973). All three refer to the entire human being. Basâr
   denotes weakness, dependence and corruptibility, nefes indicates the
   concrete human vitality of the individual, and rûah or spirit, while
   also referring to the "soul," points above all to the divine source of
   all life. Thus the human being "is" basar and nefes, and "receives"
   ruah. The term nefes, the nearest Biblical equivalent to "soul," found
   about 750 times in the Old Testament, refers to a "being that breathes"
   (cf. Ex 23:12; 31:17; 2Sam 16:14), understandably so, for its
   etymological root is very close to the term "throat" and "mouth" (cf.
   Gn 37:21; Ps 107). Nefes is likewise associated with the "blood" (cf.
   Lv 17:11; Dt 12:23). Respiration, of course, and blood are both
   tangible signs of life. Later Old Testament writings regularly use the
   term nefes to designate both life and the individual human being, and
   it is applied about 70 times to the individual or person. Man becomes a
   living nefes in receiving the "breath of life" from God (Heb. nismat;
   cf. Gn 2,7). It is interesting to note how the in the Targuminin the
   text of Gn 2:7 is translated as follows: «and man became a talking
   being». Nefes likewise refers to a variety of manifestations of human
   life, especially of an interior kind: passions, affections, desires. In
   fact it becomes almost an equivalent to the "interiority" of the human
   being, the seat of all human affections: of thought and knowledge (cf.
   Ex 23:9; Jb 16:4; Prv 12:10), of joy (Ps 85:4), of fear (Is 6:4; Is
   15:4), of piety ( Ps 85:4; 103:1.35; 142.8), of confidence (Ps 56,2)
   and of memory (Dt 4,9). The statute of "the dead" in the Old Testament
   is not far from what is common in many religious world-views of the
   same period. The dead (indicated by the Hebrew plural noun repa'îm)
   descend into the underworld or se'ol (which is not to be identified
   with the tomb in which the corpse is deposited) and remain there in a
   lethargic, somniferous, collective, inactive state, incapable of
   praising or invoking God, whose power does not reach them (cf. Pozo,
   1980, pp. 200-210)

   The term "soul" or "spirit" is also to be found in the New Testament in
   a variety of usages (cf. Schweitzer et al., 1984). Like in the Old
   Testament, the Greek term psyché indicates the psychical life referred
   to the soul or to the individual (cf. Lk 2:35; At 2:43 and 15:24; Rom
   2:9; 2Pt 2:8), also used by Jesus (cf. Mk 14:34). In the very moment of
   his his passion, Jesus' soul is "sorrowful even to death" (Mk 14:34).
   The term spirit is also widely used (pneûma) and referred to the
   personal interiority (cf. Mt 5:3; At 17:16; 1Cor 2:11; 2Cor 2:13; Heb
   12:23), though most of the passages speaks of it insofar as in relation
   to the divine Spirit, especially in the Pauline writings (cf. Rom 1:9
   and 8:10.16; 1Cor 6:17; 2Cor 12:18; Gal 6:18; but also Lk 1:80; At
   18:25). It remains clear that pneûma is different from psyché, the same
   as rûah differs from nefes (cf. 1Ts 5:23; Heb 4:12). Dying on the
   cross, Jesus "bowing his head, handed over his spirit (pneûma)" (Jn
   19:30).

   2. "In the Image and Likeness of God" . The anthropological content of
   the Scriptural terms nefes, basâr and rûah, approximate Hebrew
   equivalents of "soul," "flesh" and "spirit," is quite similar to that
   of other religious and philosophical world-views of the same period
   (cf. Wolff, 1973). The terms do not, in other words, express a
   completely distinct and clearly identifiable biblical anthropology and
   understanding of the human soul. The truly distinctive elements of
   biblical anthropology do not provide so much a description of the
   "nature" of man on his own, but rather of his "interpersonal"
   relationship with God. More attention, for instance, should be
   addressed to the term heart (Heb. lêb). Theologically speaking, the
   critical terms include creation, covenant, salvation etc. The cutting
   edge of biblical anthropology is not to be found in the everyday
   terminology describing the natural makeup of human beings, their life
   and actions, but above all in man's special statute as one "made in the
   image and likeness of God" (Gn 1:26), as "person" (cf. O'Callaghan,
   1999).

   Many Fathers of the Church, among them Clement of Alexandria, Origen
   and Athanasius took it that the "image and likeness of God" is to be
   found imprinted principally on the human soul, centre of the human
   intellect and will, in keeping with some of the fundamental intuitions
   of the Neoplatonists and Stoics (cf. Grossi, 1983; Hamman, 1987). This
   position was followed in general terms by many authors, among them
   Augustine and Thomas Aquinas. However it would be mistaken to take the
   "image and likeness of God" present in the soul as if the latter could
   be considered apart from the body. It would be more correct to say that
   the notion of "image and likeness", referring as it does to the entire
   human being, is what explains the true role, nature and purpose of the
   soul, rather than the other way around. In spite of the fact that the
   term "image of God" is not applied frequently to humans in Scripture
   (it appeares in Gn 1:26-27 e 9:6; Wis 2:23), Christian anthropology has
   always accorded it considerable value (cf. Westermann, 1984, pp.
   147-161). This is the case mainly because Jesus Christ, God's own Word
   made flesh, who died and rose from the dead, is considered to be the
   "perfect Image of the Father" (cf. 2Cor 4:4; Col 1:15; Heb 1:3; 2:6-9).
   This Christological reading of the image is confirmed by Church Fathers
   such as Ireneus (cf. Epideixis, 71), Tertullian (cf. De resurrectione
   carnis, 6, 3-4), Clement of Alexandria (cf. Paedagogus, I, 98, 3),
   Athanasius (cf. Contra Arianos 3, 10-11) and others. All Christian
   anthropology, in other words, is at heart an "implicit Christology."

   Four observations could be made on the term "image and likeness" as
   applied to humans. a) In the Old Testament texts employing the term
   "image and likeness" principally understand it in terms of human
   dominion over, or embassy to the world. No longer is the human seen as
   the product of a sort of "cosmic soul." Human superiority over the
   land, the sea, the stars and the animals is proclaimed by his being
   called and capacitated to exercise dominion over, and take care of, the
   rest of creation. Man is God's prime representative or ambassador on
   the earth. b) Being made in the "image and likeness" of God can also be
   seen to express the social character of humans and the unity of the
   human race. The activity of the human soul does not find expression in
   solitude and contemplation alone, but in communion with others, and
   fundamentally with God. c) Genesis speaks of man made "in the image and
   likeness of God" in terms of a promised immortality (cf. Gn 9:6-7; Wis
   2:23). d) All these characteristics of the human being are not
   considered as mere static properties possessed once and for all, but
   are destined to express themselves and mature on the basis of having
   received their power and energy from the creating, life-giving God,
   without in any way being confused ontologically with Him (man is not
   "in the image" of God, but is "made in the image" of God.

   Concerning the relationship between soul and immortality, it must be
   understood in the light of the biblical doctrine on the origin and
   nature of death itself (cf. Pozo, 1980). Death is not considered truly
   a part of the God's plan for man, who destined him to immortal life,
   and to communion with Himself, with nature and with others. Death came
   into the world not by the nature of things, but historically, as a
   result of human sin (Gn 3:17-19; Wis 1:13-14; 2:23-24; Rom 5:21; 6:23),
   and it will be totally eliminated at final resurrection (1Cor 15:54-5),
   promised in the Old Testament and made present definitively in Jesus
   Christ, Lord and Saviour of mankind, who died and after three days rose
   again from the dead (see Resurrection). From the standpoint of the
   understanding of the soul, the Scriptural understanding of death offers
   a important clarification: the soul, should it eventually exist
   separated from the body, would do so as it were in unnatural and
   temporal circumstances, in view of final resurrection.

V. The Soul in Christian Theology, from the Early centuries to the Middle
Ages

   1. The Fathers of the Church . On the face of things, Christians, at
   least during the first centuries, took a greater interest in ethics and
   religion than they did in the findings of science and its implications.
   This is manifested in a generalised acceptance of Platonic
   anthropological categories which express a net distinction between soul
   and body. Platonism was considered to be more pliable to Christian
   revelation and reflection than Aristotle's thought, since it focused on
   upright human behaviour and asceticism, on eternal reward for the
   individual who is faithful to God, though it contains a somewhat
   pessimistic attitude to a world in urgent need of being saved. It would
   be mistaken however to consider early Christianity in a dualistic
   light, and this for distinctly theological reasons. Body-soul "dualism"
   —whether of a Platonic or Gnostic variety— speaks of a double origin to
   the universe, unthinkable in a Judaeo-Christian monotheistic context.
   Body-soul dualism tends to identify matter with nothingness (Plotinus)
   or with evil (Mani, Priscillian), which is clearly contrary to faith in
   a free creation by a loving God of all things ex nihilo. The doctrine
   of the Resurrection of Christ, and its promised extension to believers
   at the end of time, completely obviates any essential antagonism
   between body and soul. It is understandable therefore that Christian
   writers from the beginning unanimously held to the fundamental unity of
   the human being (cf. Orbe, 1967; Fernández, 1979). Two principal
   expressions of this doctrine are to be found (cf. Greshake, 1986, pp.
   108-127; Grossi, 1983, pp. 11-84), that of the school of Antioch,
   insisting on the formation of humans from the dust of the earth and
   emphasising primarily the unity of the human being; and that of the
   Alexandrian school, considering the spiritual soul as the defining
   element of the human composite. The same basic arguments recur
   throughout the Middle Ages, right up to the Council of Vienne held in
   1312.

   According to Justin Martyr (2nd century), man is an ánthropos sarkikós
   (cf. De resurrectione, 7), naturally in the flesh. He asks: "Is man to
   be identified with the soul on its own? No, it is the soul of man. Is
   the body man? No, it is man's body. Neither of them is of itself man,
   who is a rational animal. Man is the result of the composition of both"
   (De resurrectione, 8). Athenagoras (II century) spoke in the following
   terms: "every human nature is made up of an immortal soul and a body
   adapted to it in the moment of creation; it was not the soul alone, nor
   in separation from the body, to which God destined creation and life...
   but rather to humans, composed of body and soul... A single living
   being is formed out of body and soul, a being which suffers as much as
   the soul and the body suffer" (De resurrectione, 15). In opposition to
   the Gnostics who denied final resurrection and considered that matter
   had been created by the devil, St. Iraeneus of Lyons (135-202)
   emphasised the original goodness of the flesh and developed this
   doctrine in strictly Christological terms (cf. Epideixis, 71; Adversus
   Haereses, V, 28). Tertullian (160-215) follows Iraeneus' Christological
   approach, extending it to the sacramental realm, in an audacious
   Christian "materialism" clearly opposed to the Gnosticism of
   Valentinus. Caro cardo salutis, he declares, "the flesh is the hinge of
   our salvation" (De carnis resurrectione, 8). As a result, though in man
   both body and soul are present, neither component can be said to be
   prior to the other. Conversely, authors of a more Platonic bent such as
   Clement of Alexandria, Origen and Gregory of Nyssa in the East, and
   Lactantius and Augustine in the West, gave priority to the soul in
   explaining the origin and dignity of the human being. Though in no case
   do these authors deny the true unity that binds body and soul, human
   specificity is defined in terms of the soul.

   In the anthropology of Origen (185-253), the predominance Plato gives
   to the soul is also present. His systematic opposition to the Gnostics
   doea not bring him, however, to insist on the divine origin and dignity
   of matter as Iraeneus did, but above on all the freedom and
   responsibility of individual humans in the original fall. Many Gnostics
   considered the tyrannical power of matter to be such, that humans had
   been virtually constrained to sin and slavery. Origen however had no
   doubt but that God had created matter, but had done so in order to
   punish wayward souls.

   Openly opposed Manichaeistic dualism in respect of matter, Augustine
   (354-430) drew considerably on the doctrine of Plato. "The better part
   of man is his soul -he says- the body is not all man, but the inferior
   part of man" (De civitate Dei, XIII, 24). Nonetheless Augustine does
   reject the Platonic notion of the pre-existence (or native divinity) of
   the human soul, and its temporal precedence over the body. As regards
   the origin of the soul, he accepts neither Plotinus' emanationism, nor
   Origen's doctrine of the simultaneous creation of souls at the
   beginning of time. The theology of original sin and its transmission
   inclines him towards the theory of "traducianism," popularised by
   Tertullian, according to which the souls of children are drawn from
   that of their parents and not from God. Yet he remains undecided
   between this and the theory of "individual creationism" (first taught
   by Lactantius, cf. De opificio Dei, 19, 73) which with time become the
   doctrine most commonly accepted by Christians. For Augustine, in fact,
   body and soul are mutually necessary elements of the human composite.
   The human being is not the body alone or the soul alone; when both are
   united at the same moment, then there is man. "It would be false —says
   Augustine— to say that man consists of the mind (Lat. mens; Gr. noûs),
   and add that what is in the flesh is not man" (Sermones, CLIV, 10, 15).
   It is clear however that Augustine envisages the union between body and
   soul in terms of a hierarchical and dynamic interaction. He states that
   man is a rational soul that uses a mortal and earthly body.
   Analogously, to feel is not proper to the body, but rather to the soul
   by the body; neither does the body feel, but the soul feels by the body
   (cf. De Genesi ad litteram, III, 7).

   Official Church statements over the patristic period regarding
   anthropology in general and the soul in particular vouch for the divine
   origin of both body and soul, and, in the context of creation, man and
   evil, oppose the principal tenets of Gnosticism. The following points
   are relevant. First, the human soul is neither part of or an emanation
   of the divinity; neither does it derive from the divine substance (cf.
   DH 190, 201, 285, 455, 685), but is created by God immediately (Lat.
   immediate), that is directly, without intermediaries (cf. DH 190, 360;
   a teaching affirmed again by Pius XII's Humani generis, cf. DH 3896),
   and ex nihilo from nothing pre-existing (cf. DH 190, 360, 685). Souls
   do not pre-exist ab aeterno, as Origen suggested, nor do they become
   enclosed in a body in punishment for their sin (cf. DH 403, 456).
   Second, the Church professes the original goodness of "matter", of the
   body and of the world, insofar as it is all created by God. Many
   Gnostics considered in fact that the devil created matter and wages war
   on humans (on the human soul) through the body. As a result they often
   considered marriage and procreation as the work of the devil. The
   Church consistently rejected these teachings, for example at the
   Council of Braga in 561, and at Lateran Council IV (1215) and the
   Council of Florence (1442) (cf. DH 457-463, 802, 1333, 1336). Third,
   the unity of body of soul is expressed in three ways: a) in terms of
   the oneness of divine creating action by God, «creator of all things,
   seen and unseen» (DH 150); b) on the basis of the doctrine of final
   resurrection "of the same flesh" (DH 72; 76; 325; 540; 574; 684; 801);
   and c) on the basis of the "hypostatic" union that unites in the person
   of the Word the divinity and perfect humanity of Christ, made up of
   body and rational soul: "sicut anima rationalis et caro unus est homo,
   ita Deus et homo unus est Christus" (DH 76).

   2. The Debate on the Nature of the Soul in Mediaeval Thought and the
   Contribution of Thomas Aquinas . Christian anthropology during the
   Patristic period is Christological in approach, though linguistically
   and conceptually Platonic. Things change somewhat during the Middle
   Ages. In rather simplistic terms it may be said that Christology and
   Platonism are replaced, respectively, by eschatology and
   Aristotelianism (cf. Wicki, 1954). The question being asked here
   relates to the anthropological implications of the eschatological
   salvation won by Christ: how can a part of the human composite survive
   death?, and, how is the body saved?

   In the early Middle Ages, under the influence of Augustine, the
   approach of St. Bonaventure (1217-1274) and Hugh of St. Victor
   (1096-1141) is still decidedly Platonic. According to Hugh of St.
   Victor, God has created the soul and not the body in his image and
   likeness; that is why it is immortal; yet on account of its union with
   the soul, the body partakes in the latter's immortality as a beneficium
   creationis . Body and soul are complete substances, accidentally united
   to one another, and the separated soul therefore may be considered as a
   person in its own right. And just as the body did not give the soul its
   personal being in being united with it, neither will it take it away
   when it corrupts at death. As a result, final resurrection is of slight
   theological import. The decisive twist comes, however, with the
   introduction of Aristotle's thought through the agency of his Arabic
   commentators such as Averroes, Avicenna and Maimonides whose influence
   made itself felt during the 1200's. Gilbert de la Porrée (1080-1154)
   and William of Auvergne (1180-1249) consider the human being in a more
   harmonic way, following the Aristotelian perspective of the soul as the
   form of the body: the soul is to the body what form is to matter. The
   "in-forming" role of the soul is considered essential both to its own
   nature and to the body which it constitutes as human. The apparently
   insuperable tension (cf. Dales, 1995) between the Aristotelian doctrine
   of substantial union between body and soul, and the Platonic vision of
   the immortality of the soul and its metaphysical independence from the
   body, is given a decisive clarification, if not a definitive solution,
   by St. Thomas Aquinas (1225-1274) (cf. Bertola, 1973; Moreau, 1976;
   Lobato, 1987; Pegis, 1974 and 1976).

   It should be noted that Aquinas attempted to overcome the tension
   between the Platonic and Aristotelian tendencies for theological and
   Christian reasons (cf. Summa Theologiae, I, q. 75; for issues related
   to the human soul see the qq. 75-90). The human soul is the form of a
   body because of the kind of substance it is, he says (we note that the
   term "substance" must be understood as something that exists per se).
   It is not a pure spirit, nor a separated substance, but an intellectual
   substance that informs, "shapes" or configures the body. The novelty
   introduced by Aquinas over the teaching of Aristotle was as follows:
   whereas the latter considered non-divine substances as composed
   generally speaking of "matter" and "form", the former considered each
   substance as a composition of essence and the individual "act of being"
   (Lat. esse, existence). In every creature there is a composition
   between potency and act: both Aristotle and Aquinas accept that. Yet
   according to Aquinas the act need not correspond in every case to a
   particular substantial form, nor potency to matter, as Aristotle
   thought. The soul is a substance, in that it is composed of essence
   (that of a spiritual form) and act of being deriving directly from the
   divine creating action. This gives man full metaphysical individuality
   or incommunicability (cf. Summa Contra Gentiles, book II, ch. 75; De
   Unitate Intellectus contra Averroistas, n. 2), a teaching Aquinas
   insisted upon against commentators of Aristotle such as Averroes, who
   in a sense had attempted to "platonise" Aristotle (cf. Fabro, 1955, p.
   269). Besides, since it includes no materiality in its own structure,
   the soul is simple and incorruptible. "The body is not united to the
   soul accidentally, because the very being of the soul is also the being
   of the body, thus being common to both" (Quaestio de anima, a. 1, ad
   1^um). In technical terms, it can be said that the soul communicates
   being to the body at the level of formal, not efficient causality.

   The question Aquinas faced was the following one: can an incorruptible
   spiritual substance be the form of a corruptible body, constituting
   with it a substantial unity of being (cf. Summa Contra Gentiles, book
   II, ch. 56)? His reply is in the affirmative, for the soul's very
   purpose is to communicate the being by which it subsists to the body
   (cf. ibidem, chps. 68-72). The following observations can be made. a)
   The rational soul is the form of the body not through its potencies and
   virtualities as Avicenna held, but by its very essence. Though
   subsistent, it is proper to the soul to "inform" the body, and it
   stands in need of the body for its own perfection (cf. Summa
   Theologiae, I, q. 51, a. 1). b) The rational soul is the one and only
   form of the human body, being at one and the same time vegetative,
   animal and rational. By a single act of being the human soul is the
   form of the body and of all its functions. Thus there are no
   intermediaries of any kind between the body and the soul. The fact that
   a particular human being does not exercise all its faculties only means
   that they are in potentiality to their acts; the situation is different
   with God, for whom the power of acting and act itself are identical
   with the divine substance. c) The soul as such does not exist prior to
   the body, though it is metaphysically prior to the body in that it is a
   form that is independent of the body as regards its being. This is what
   makes it possible to speak of the "incorruptibility" of the soul
   (Aquinas speaks of "immortality" regarding the human being insofar as
   he participates in the divine life through the gift of grace). Aquinas
   demonstrates the incorruptibility of soul not on Platonic but on
   distinctly Aristotelian premises. The soul can, potentially, know all
   things material, and can transcend itself, since it must be immaterial
   and thus incorruptible (cf. Summa Theologiae, I, q. 75, a. 6; cf.
   Foster, 1993). d) The separated soul is neither a man nor a person.
   After death it retains a natural tension (Lat. commensuratio) towards
   "its" body, so that the soul united to the body is more like God than
   when separated from the body, because it possesses its nature more
   perfectly (cf. De Potentia, q. 5, a. 10, ad 5^um).

   Aquinas was aware of the need to insist both on the metaphysical
   priority of the human soul, and its substantial unity with the body,
   according to the formula anima forma corporis. He did so: a) for
   theological reasons, to avoid that any body/soul duality or considering
   matter as an independent co-source of human existence, would compromise
   the oneness and simplicity of the creating work of God; b) for
   anthropological reasons, wishing to avoid the Averroist position which
   would have seriously compromised the individuality and dignity of each
   human being by reducing human immortality after death to absorption
   into a common separated substance; and c) on the basis of a healthy
   trust in the reliability of empirical observation and scientific
   discourse. However, two points still remained unclear in Aquinas' view:
   the unicity of the human soul, and the statute of the separated soul.

   After the death of Aquinas (1274), the bishop of Paris Stephen Tempier
   and, later, the archbishop of Canterbury Robert Kilwardby and his
   successor John Peckham, rejected as false the Thomistic thesis of the
   unicity of the soul, they all maintaining the existence of three
   different souls in the human being. The "plurimorphic hypotheses," that
   in real terms came closer to Plato than to Aristotle, was followed by
   most of the scholars of that epoch, among them the leader of the
   Franciscan "spiritual" faction, Pier di Giovanni Olivi. The
   plurimorphic theories, however, in spite of appearing to resolve
   certain difficulties, had one weak point: they were unable to explain
   and guarantee the unity of the human being, for an accidental union can
   only give rise to several distinct substances. As a result authors such
   as Richard Knapwell and John of Paris began to repropose Aquinas'
   theory of the soul as the unique form of the body, insisting that body
   and soul are not truly distinct realities. Finally, Aquinas' position
   was taken up at the Ecumenical Council of Vienne in 1312, which states
   that "substantia animae rationalis seu intellectivae, vere, per se et
   essentialiter humani corporis forma - the soul truly, of itself and
   essentially is the unique form of the human body" (DH 902). The
   doctrinal point of departure of this statement is at heart
   Christological: the same conciliar decree taught against Olivi that the
   unity/oneness of the saving humanity of Jesus Christ is what points to
   the substantial unity of human beings in general (cf. DH 900).

   It is easily to understand that Aquinas' position concerning the
   situation of the soul, once separated from the body, remained unclear.
   Thomas himself was keenly aware that after death the separated soul
   does not fulfil its essential purpose, that of "in-forming" the body.
   Averroists at Padua kept insisting that there is only one, common,
   immortal intellect. Conversely, followers of Alexander of Aphrodisias
   such as Peter Pomponazzi claimed that man has no immortal intellect.
   According to Pomponazzi (1462-1525), intellectual operations depend
   indeed on the body, but this does not mean there exists an independent
   intellectual substance. In different directions both schools
   (Averroists and followers of Pomponazzi) came to deny personal
   immortality. However, Pope Leo X, with the approval of the Fifth
   Lateran Council (1513), rejected the proposition that "the human soul
   is mortal or that it is one for all humans" (DH 1440).

   The teaching of the Protestant Reformers differs little materially from
   that which is taught commonly during the Middle Ages. Nobody questioned
   the common doctrine of the composition and unity of body and soul,
   though the latter was understood, at least implicitly, in a Platonic
   and spiritualist sense, more centred on individual salvation after
   death (immortality of the soul) than on eschatological consummation at
   the end of time (see Resurrection). Yet under the influence of
   Nominalism and Augustinianism, a subtle change began to take place. It
   was no longer generally accepted that the existence and nature of the
   soul could be arrived at by rational deduction, whether in Aristotelian
   or Platonic terms. Peter Aureolus (1280-1322) and William of Ockham
   (1280-1349) thought that there was no reason to attribute the
   immaterial acts of knowing and willing to an immaterial form or soul,
   the existence of which can only be known by faith. Likewise Cardinal
   Cajetan (1468-1534) was convinced that the immortality of the soul is
   as unknown to humans as the mystery of the Blessed Trinity or the
   Incarnation of the Word, and opposed Lateran V's suggestion that
   philosophers should teach students how to justify this doctrine
   rationally (cf. Martin, 1995). Perhaps on account of a certain
   pessimism present in the later Middle Ages the doctrine of the survival
   of the soul after death and its final reintegration at resurrection was
   coming strictly under the sway of the theological virtues of faith and
   hope, and no longer under reason. It is interesting to add that Ockham,
   though accepting by faith the existence of an immaterial and
   incorruptible form in man, was not prepared to say that this form
   informs matter directly. He endorsed the opinion according to which
   there are in the human being several substantial forms, at least a form
   of corporeity and the intellectual soul, or perhaps three distinct
   forms. It would seem therefore that the loosening of the bond between
   soul and body and the gradual reappearance of dualism, was accompanied
   by an ever growing difficulty of reflecting on the ontological reality
   of the soul in purely rational terms. Immortality is no longer
   considered a "natural" quality of the human soul, but rather a gift of
   the divine grace. In other words, both dualism and fideism seemed to
   move at the same pace. Understandably, philosophers began turn their
   attention to the human soul in terms of tangible human subjectivity,
   overlooking its ontological aspects.

VI. The Human Soul and Subjectivity in Modern Philosophy

   It may be said that the existence and subsistence of the human soul
   becomes, after the existence of God, the principal, unquestioned
   "article of faith" of recent centuries. Yet its existence and
   properties are explained and reflected upon not in metaphysical terms.
   The soul is not looked upon as a reality that founds immaterial
   actions, but mainly as an element localising human thought,
   consciousness and subjectivity, in the context of a prevailing
   scepticism induced by Nominalism and reinforced by fideism (cf. Stock,
   1999).

   1. Radical Dualism and the Supremacy of the Soul. The humanism of the
   Renaissance went beyond putting the soul at the centre of things; the
   centre, rather, is human subjectivity, as in the writings of Marcellus
   Ficinus (1433-1499). Intent on countering the inroads of sceptical
   empiricism,  Descartes (1596-1650) attempted to establish a kind of
   "clear and distinct idea," an incontrovertible point of certitude that
   goes beyond all doubt, in observing that human thinking and existence
   always go together. "I can be sure of nothing else but that I think,"
   he would say; and as a result, cogito, ergo sum, "I think, therefore I
   am" (Principia Philosophiae I, 10). We are able to doubt everything, he
   says, except the fact that we exist and think. As a result, for
   Descartes, the soul itself is considered as a thinking subjectivity,
   the self-thinking self. In this process, he observes, thought is
   distinct from both the body and sensation; the soul in fact operates on
   the basis of "innate" ideas and relates to the body only accidentally.
   Body and soul are thus separate substances, the res extensa and the res
   cogitans respectively, and there is no true substantial union between
   them. "I have a body to which I am closely united," he says.
   "Nonetheless since on the one hand I have a clear and distinct idea of
   myself, according to which I am only a thing that thinks and not
   something extensive, it is certain that I, that is, my soul, by which I
   am what I am, is completely and truly distinct from my body"
   (Meditationes de Prima Philosophia,  VI). Though Descartes insists that
   the union between body and soul is very close, his vision is
   undoubtedly dualistic. The human being consists of two complete though
   mutually linked substances: he is an animal controlled by a spiritual
   soul. The soul exercises its influence on the vital spirits of the
   pineal gland, where it is located, and in return it receives images and
   sensations from the corporal organs.

   Malebranche (1638-1715) takes up the basic thrust of Descartes'
   arguments, affirming however that the soul does not exercise any real
   influence over the body, or vice versa. Rather, the desires of the soul
   provide God with the "occasion" of producing the required reaction in
   the body. Spinoza (1632-1677) radicalises Descartes' doctrine in a
   pantheistic fashion by affirming that body and soul are two modes of
   the one Substance, coinciding respectively with extension and thought.
   In other words there is a strict psycho-physical parallelism between
   "body" and "soul." Both terms designate the same reality: the soul is
   the "idea of the body"; the body is the object of the mental idea that
   constitutes it. Instead of "soul", Spinoza speaks preferentially of
   "mind" (Lat. mens). The understanding of the relationship between body
   and soul is expressed by Leibniz (1646-1716) with the aid of his theory
   of monads: simple, indivisible, incorruptible, closed, incommunicable
   substances out of which everything is composed. For Leibniz body and
   soul relate to one another in a purely exterior fashion, working side
   by side synchronically, in that the Creator establishes a primordial
   harmony between them. Similar ways of speaking of the soul are to be
   found in authors such as Goethe, Hölderlin and Moses Mendelssohn (cf.
   Pieper, 1968).

   Understandably the problematic side of the equivalence Descartes
   established between soul and consciousness would come to the fore with
   the passing of time. In fact Immanuel Kant (1724-1804) censured
   Descartes, Mendelssohn and Leibniz for uncritically affirming
   continuity between the psychological and metaphysical spheres. It is
   not legitimate, he said, to deduce the existence of a soul that is
   substantial, simple, incorruptible, personal, spiritual and immortal
   from the subjective experience of thinking (cf. Critique of Pure
   Reason, II, II, 1). The soul may be said to exist, Kant says, but only
   as an idea or "postulate of practical reason." That is to say, were
   there no such thing as the human soul, it would be impossible to
   develop a consistent religious and ethical system. He considers the
   doctrine of final resurrection, however, as merely symbolic or even
   superfluous.

   2. The Soul and the Self as a Product of Matter. The English
   philosopher David Hume (1711-1776) developed the scepticism motif,
   referred to above, in open opposition to Descartes. He argued that
   human selfhood is but a "bundle of perceptions," a kind of theatre in
   which different apprehensions make their appearance and which bring us
   to come to consciousness in knowing. In other words consciousness
   derives from the presence of objects perceived, and not from a
   pre-existent spiritual soul. Hume does not as such deny the soul (or
   better, the mind) as a spiritual substance, but affirms simply that we
   have no way of proving its existence. In a similar fashion William
   James (1842-1910), passsing from Hume's agnosticism to an explicit
   materialism, concluded that the soul did not exist at all but was
   merely a collection of psychic phenomena. Bertrand Russell (1872-1970)
   would graphically describe the spirit as "matter in gaseous state."

   A distinct phenomenon facilitating the decline of the Cartesian
   understanding of the soul developed in the area of experimental
   psychology at the end of the 19th and beginning of the 20th centuries.
   The psychologies of Freud, Jung and Adler, took no interest in "the
   soul" as such. All three, however, in spite of significant variants,
   developed psychologies "of the deep," and came to appreciate that the
   mind does not operate only at a conscious level, as Descartes and
   others as much as said by identifying the soul with conscious thought.
   The mind has a life of its own, much of which is "unconscious" or
   "subconscious." Though the notion of "depth" had not been lost on
   classical thought —think of Augustine's cor (or to the corresponding
   biblical term), and of Bonaventure's apex - however, Freud's symbolic
   equivalent of the "soul" remains entirely self-referential, unrelated
   to God or religion; psychoanalysis and psychotherapy take the place of
   spiritual life (mysticism) and redemption. Against Descartes depth
   psychologies also "rediscovered" that the human mind is deeply
   influenced and determined by somatic influences of all kinds, a notion
   to which Aquinas, with his doctrine of the soul as the only substantial
   form of the human body, gave full expression.

   Some authors of the phenomenological school such as Edmund Husserl
   (1859-1938) attempted to go beyond mere descriptive psychology, and
   revindicated a renewed ontology of the human spirit. However,
   experimental psychology, by the fact that it insisted on the
   psychosomatic unity of the human being, tended for the most part to
   deny its spirituality, immortality and free will. Something of a kind
   is to be found in Marxist thought. In linking realism with materialism,
   Marxists considered the "soul" as a mere epiphenomenon or product of
   matter, and denied its existence as a spiritual substance. Friedrich
   Engels (1820-1895) once said: "What is original, spirit or nature?
   According as one responds to this question, philosophers divide in two
   great schools. Those who affirm the originality of spirit over nature
   admit in one way or another the creation of the world... Those for whom
   nature is original belong to the different schools of materialism" (L.
   Feuerbach und der Ausgang des klassischen deutsche Philosophie, 1886).
   For materialists the "soul" as such does exist. It is a conventional
   term used to express the unstable and alienating epiphenomenon of
   individual human life. Psychical and conscious life are considered the
   highest product of matter (of the physical world). They are the
   function of that particularly complex form of matter called the "human
   brain."

VII. The Soul in Modern Science: Evolutionism and the Mind-Brain Problem

   Modern science has given special attention, directly and indirectly, to
   the human soul in two directions: in dealing with the evolutionist
   hypothesis and in relation to the Mind-Body problem developed by
   philosophers and neurologists during the 20th century.

   1. Evolutionism and Hominization. In 1859 Charles Darwin (1809-1882)
   published his famous work The Origin of the Species by means of Natural
   Selection. Though many of his findings have since been thoroughly
   revised and even reversed, the original thesis he put forward, that
   humans are direct descendants of the higher primates, was destined to
   become extremely popular. Besides, on the basis of evolutionary and
   genetic continuity with lower animals, and therefore with the
   biological, chemical and physical world, it began to be argued that man
   could have evolved ultimately from even lower forms of life. Though
   many scientists and philosophers accepted Darwin's position and
   followed through on it, theologians and Christian philosophers for the
   most part expressed reservations. On the basis of the contrary teaching
   of Scripture, they perceived that evolutionism seriously questioned the
   unity and transcendental character of man. Given however that humans
   probably share 99,5% of their evolutionary history and 95% of their
   genetic patrimony with higher primates it is understandable that
   scientists and philosophers would continue attempting to come up with
   other possible explanations of the evolutionist phenomenon. Several
   Christian thinkers (cf. Gardeil, 1893; Leroy, 1891; Zahm, 1896) and
   others during the 19th and early 20th centuries formulated what was
   known as the "transformist" hypothesis, which explained that the human
   body proceeds, ultimately, from non-human parents, yet the soul is
   created directly by God. Becoming a human being (what is generally
   called "hominization") may be considered therefore as a process that is
   staged in time. This hypothesis simplifies things a lot, in that the
   body is taken to be the reserve of science, while the soul is put aside
   for the study of theologians and philosophers.

   Though Church authorities reacted at first against these positions,
   theological reflection continued. In the Encyclical Humani generis
   (1950) Pope Pius XII made it clear that the evolutionist hypothesis
   —specifically in respect of the origin of the human body from already
   existing living matter— is not a priori contrary to Catholic faith (cf.
   DH 3897). This teaching was confirmed and made more precise by John
   Paul II (cf. Message to the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, October 22,
   1996; cf. also John Paul II, General Audience, May 27, 1998, n. 5), who
   refers to evolution as a "theory," and no longer as an "hypothesis."
   However it should be noted that the evolutionist theory of staged
   hominization, even in mitigated form, is still problematic from a
   philosophical standpoint, for it can easily be seen to mark a return to
   the plurimorphist explanations common throughout the Middle Ages, or
   even to outright dualism. Should the human body already possess a
   complete "form" of its own (vegetative, sensitive) before the creation
   and infusion of the soul, then the latter can hardly be considered as
   the unica forma corporis (see above, V.2), and the difficulties typical
   of the dualistic interactionist theories of Descartes and others will
   tend to arise anew. Although we do not know how a link took place
   between the higher primates and Homo sapiens, in order to avoid
   dualistic extrinsecism we should join the adjective "human" to the body
   only insofar as it is united to the soul. According to this Church
   teaching, the "human body" begins to exist only when the human soul is
   created. It should be added of course that science may well be in a
   position to establish that the evolutionary history and genetic pattern
   of humans coincide more or less with those of higher primates. Yet such
   a morphological or genetic continuity is not enough to postulate a
   direct causal link between non-human progenitors and Homo sapiens,
   unless we endorse a reductionistic view of all properly human
   behaviour. Strictly speaking, such a missing link is not open to
   scientific research, but rather to philosophical (and not only
   theological) enquiry.

   2. The Mind-Body Relationship. The growth of experimental psychology
   during the 20th century spawned a wide variety of schools and
   scientific approaches to the question the soul and human specificity.
   Of particular importance was the "methodological behaviourism" of B.F.
   Skinner (The Analysis of Behavior, New York 1969) and the "logical
   behaviourism" of Gilbert Ryle (The Concept of Mind, London 1949). In
   simple terms, "behaviourists" consider humans as highly complex
   machines whose laws and workings can be deduced by scientific
   observation of their external behaviour. Platonic or Cartesian dualisms
   are strictly excluded.

   Criticisms of behaviourism did not delay in coming (cf. Bunge, 1980;
   Rorty, 1980). Yet the perennial dilemma of the relationship between
   body and soul comes to the fore again in terms of the relationship
   between mind (which takes the place of "soul" or "spirit") and body.
   Against empiricists, materialists and behaviourists, the existence of
   the mind is unequivocally affirmed. Yet it is still asked: what is the
   relationship between the self, subjectivity, the mind, on the one hand,
   and the biological, chemical and physical organism usually termed the
   brain, on the other? A wide variety of explanations drawing on
   neurobiology, the cognitive sciences, information theory, computer
   science, linguistics and sociology, have been suggested (cf. Seifert,
   1989; Pinkas, 1995; Maldamé, 1998; Searle, 1998): the theory of
   identity (Feigl) with the associated question of artificial
   intelligence, that of emergentism (Bunge), and that of interactive
   dualism (Popper, Eccles).

   Helmuth Feigl in his work The "Mental" and the "Physical" (1958),
   taking issue with the behaviourist position, insists on the real
   existence of the human mind. The human being is more than an automated
   mechanism driven by stimulus and response. Human behaviour, at least in
   part, is directed by a self-conscious self. Hence the "self" cannot be
   identified with behaviour as such, but with the interior principle of
   behaviour. The mind however, according to Feigl, is identified purely
   and simply with the brain. He takes this approach because of what he
   calls "the principle of economy" according to which there is no need to
   multiply unnecessarily the causes of any phenomenon. If therefore all
   human processes, events and mental states (mental teleology,
   behavioural intentionalism, cognition, willing choice) can be explained
   adequately on the basis of the workings of the brain, there is no need
   to postulate the existence of a spiritual principle of life. Feigl
   takes it that this is the case: if cerebral processes could be mapped
   in sufficient detail on a screen as it were, human action and
   development could be suitably predicted. Leaving aside for the moment
   the fact that many philosophers and neurologists refuse to identify the
   mind (or soul) with the brain, what Crick (1994) called the "binding
   problem" still remains, and can be stated as follows: what keeps such
   structures in their place first of all, and, even more, where did their
   form or structure originate?

   The "emergentist materialism" of Mario Bunge (1980) rendered Feigl's
   reductionist view obsolete (cf. Del Re, 1997). Matter is all that
   exists, according to Bunge, but within reality matter expresses itself
   in qualitatively distinct levels of being. Each level supposes the
   anterior one, yet surpasses it ontologically. Common experience does
   not permit us to understand everything in purely physical terms. He
   accepts that the mind is the brain, but adds that the human brain
   differs qualitatively and not only quantitatively from any other known
   material object. The human being must thus be distinguished both from
   the biosphere, and from his nearest genetic relative, the chimpanzee.
   The principal property of Bunge's emergentist materialism is what he
   calls "plasticity," that is the aptitude of the brain to programme and
   organise itself. The theory of emergentism attempts to find a better
   theory to fit the facts than does the reductionist identity theory.
   Similar attempts may be found in recent years in authors such as
   Changeux (1983, 1989), Dennett (1995), Edelman (1987/8) and Boncinelli
   (1999). However, insofar as they generally begin with a monistic view
   of reality from which higher levels of life are seen to spontaneously
   emerge, it is difficult to shake off the impression that such levels
   are merely quantitative improvements of the lower ones. Little space is
   left for either human intentionality or transcendence (Maldamé, 1998).

   Mind-body dualism continues to be popular among philosophers and
   scientists. Authors such as Karl Popper (1977) and John Eccles (1989)
   are probably still the best known representatives (cf. Popper and
   Eccles 1977; Eccles 1989). Karl Popper approaches the problem of the
   mind-body relationship from the perspective of his theory of the "three
   worlds". Apart from the world of physical entities (World 1) and of
   mental phenomena such as subjective experiences, consciousness, etc.
   (World 2), there is also a world comprising the products of the mind:
   history, scientific theories, social institutions, works of art, etc.
   (World 3). The existence of World 1 cannot be doubted. Yet Popper holds
   that real existence must be attributed to the other two as well in that
   their empirical effects can be experienced and checked in that they
   really act on the inferior worlds. It is evident that the products of
   the mind (World 3) are what most decisively influence physical reality
   (World 1). As a result, it must be said that there exist real beings
   that are incorporeal. But World 3 exercises its influence on World 1
   only through the workings of the mind, World 2, which according to
   Popper is a real entity that surpasses the purely physical and
   corporal, even though it is in need of them in order to act. In other
   words, the mind is distinct from the brain, even though it interacts
   closely with it. Thus it is the self that possesses the brain, and not
   the other way around. Popper in fact quite openly adopts the
   explanation popularised by Plato: the self (the soul) is like a tiller
   to a boat, or like a pianist to a piano. The position of Popper has
   been accepted by other renowned philosophers and neurophysicists such
   as John Eccles, A. Green, R. Penrose and R.W. Sperry. Though confirming
   the need to retain the presence of a non-material principle of action
   in the human being, this position tends however to return to the
   problematic positions of Plato and Descartes.

VIII. The Human Soul between Theology and Science

   After this survey it would seem that only two main alternatives remain
   as regards the existence and substantiality of the human soul: dualism
   and monism. Either the human soul exists as a separate (or at least
   separable) substance that controls the body from without (Plato,
   Descartes, Popper), in principle a "spiritual" substance produced by
   the divinity and capable of meaningful survival after death. Or it
   designates a configuring form totally bound up with the unitary
   psychosomatic structure of humans, which simply dissolves at death.
   Understandably, the Christian doctrine of creation and eschatological
   fulfilment cannot accept either as a unique solution. Many attempts
   have been made by theologians throughout the 20th century to express
   anew what is intended traditionally by the human soul, especially in
   the context of the challenges presented by the sciences. We shall
   briefly examine Karl Rahner's (1904-1984) understanding of
   "hominization," and the Lutheran Wolfhart Pannenberg's (born 1928)
   explanation of human identity in the context of eschatological
   salvation. Both suggest what might be termed "actualistic"
   understandings of the human soul (cf. G. Greshake, G. Lohfink, 1975).

   Karl Rahner (1961) explains that the origin of life can be attributed
   entirely to God in the realm of primary causality (creation), and
   entirely to generation as regards secondary causality (that is
   evolution). God can thus be considered as the real and transcendental
   basis of the evolutionary process in the world. That is to say, God
   works at the very heart of creation in and through secondary causes,
   without ever replacing or interrupting them. Divine causality in other
   words acts from within a finite causality, elevating and empowering it
   to go beyond its own potentialities. God's action therefore is what
   brings about the creature's self-transcendence, what scientists might
   call "emergentism." Applying this principle to humans, Rahner says that
   both God and pre-hominoids are fully the cause of the entire human
   being. God's power brings out the full potential of the prehominoid
   state, constituting humans as persons, thus going beyond the biological
   chain of reproduction. As a result the uniqueness, irreplaceability and
   spirituality of the human person is rooted in the creating and
   empowering action of God. "Emergentism" leads both to "personhood" and
   "grace."

   A number of 20th century Reformed authors, such as Thielicke, Althaus,
   Cullmann, Barth and Pannenberg, commonly deny the "natural" immortality
   of the human soul, and as a result, its substantiality as a
   metaphysical co-principle of the human being. Some Catholic theologians
   have tended to move in the same direction (for example, Greshake,
   Lohfink, Ruiz de la Peña). The theology of the first Reformers,
   however, had not traditionally denied the immortality and
   substantiality of the human soul, but quite the contrary, although they
   emphasized that it was a tenet of faith, and, as such, unattainable by
   reason alone. This change of perspective is mainly due to the
   preference contemporary authors have for both pure Biblical exegesis
   (Scripture speaks openly of final resurrection and not so much of the
   immortality of the soul), and "de-Hellenization" of historical
   Christianity, thus calling the existence of the soul into question.
   However, it seems that the main difficulty Reformed theologians
   encounter with the doctrine of the immortality and substantiality of
   the human soul lies elsewhere. In modern philosophy the soul had come
   to be understood mainly in terms of subjectivity and of a human
   aspiration to the Absolute (for Lessing the soul is an "an infinite
   striving," for Fichte it is the combination of knowledge and deed, for
   Nietzsche, the will to power). In such a context, an immortal soul is
   perceived as a source of autonomous human actions and thus a threat to
   the traditional Luteran doctrine of justification by faith alone, by
   grace alone, as if the human being could offer to God something that
   had not first been received from Him (cf. A. Ahlbrecht, Tod und
   Unsterblichkeit in der evangelischen Theologie der Gegenwart
   [Paderborn: Verlag Bonifacius-Druckerei, 1955], pp. 112-120;
   O'Callaghan, 1997). According to Karl Barth, if God alone is immortal
   (cf. 1Tm 6:16), then the human soul cannot be such.

   Leaving aside the variety of questions the denial of the immortality of
   the soul involves from a theological standpoint, some Reformed
   theologians in recent times have wished to recuperate the notion of
   soul (cf. Hermann, 1997). Others, such as the Lutheran theologian
   Wolfhart Pannenberg, have put forward what might be termed an
   "actualist" or dynamic understanding of what has traditionally be
   called the human soul (cf. Pannenberg, 1998). According to the latter
   the "separated soul" after death should not be considered as a
   subsistent being as such; rather the individual human being would as it
   were be "retained" in the mind of God during the intermediate period
   between death and final resurrection. At the consummation of time the
   person would receive definitive fullness and immortality as a kind of
   new creation.

   Pannenberg takes it that modern science has demonstrated that the
   "soul" is not an object as such, but rather an aspect of the dynamism
   of life and of human behaviour. Hence it would make no sense to speak
   of the immortality "of" the soul. Besides, he notes that Christian hope
   is founded on the notion of novelty, and not on that of stability and
   continuity. Pannenberg admits however that Christian theology has
   historically accepted the notion of the subsistence and survival of the
   soul as a vital principle, for reasons not necessarily bound up with an
   uncritical assimilation of Platonism. The doctrine in fact is closely
   related to salvation and resurrection, and was put forward in order to
   ensure that human identity between the earthly and risen state is
   maintained. The so-called "immortality of the soul" is what made it
   possible for resurrection to take place; the "soul" as forma corporis
   was seen to retain the scheme, project, genetic code or éidos (that is,
   the image) of the individual human being. Pannenberg considers,
   however, that a subsistent immortal soul capable of surviving death and
   ensuring final resurrection should in principle be in a position to
   undergo new human experiences. However this would actually disqualify
   its very reason of being, for new experiences (those involved for
   example in purgatorial purification and the intercession of the saints)
   would provide the soul with a distinct identity, as if the human person
   was present in plenitude. As an alternative, Pannenberg suggests that
   human identity "during" the intermediate period between death and
   resurrection would be guaranteed better if such identity were retained
   or "codified" in God himself, because it is only "in Him" that our
   lives and histories can be made immortal.

IX. Concluding Reflections: is the Human Soul an "Action" or a "Substance"?

   A proper application of Aquinas's hylomorphism may well be in a
   position to overcome the drawbacks of both monistic and dualistic
   understandings of the relationship between body and soul (cf. Borghi,
   1992). Thomas Aquinas strenuously opposed the teaching of Averroes
   which suggested that the so-called "possible" (or receptive) intellect
   was unique, and common to all human beings. If the "possible intellect"
   were single and separate, then it would be divine and eternal, and as a
   result the senses and imagination would be only accidentally involved
   in intellection. He likewise opposed Avicenna and others who spoke of
   the oneness of the "agent intellect" (though admitting the plurality of
   possible intellects). Were it so, the intellectual operations would not
   belong to the one and same individual subject, since the latter would
   be a mere instrument of someone else, says Thomas Aquinas, adding: hic
   homo intelligit —it is "this" man who knows, understands, etc. (cf.
   Summa Theologiae, I, q. 76, a. 1). If a "unique" intellect is assumed
   for all, the human soul is nothing but a fragment of deity which is in
   act in every individual; likewise, the senses and immagination could
   play only a merely accidental role in human knowledge (cf. Summa Contra
   Gentiles, book II, ch. 76; Summa Theologiae, I, q. 79, aa. 4-5). The
   position maintained by Rahner and Pannenberg is not far from what
   Aquinas here intends to criticize. They both suggest what might be
   termed an "actualistic" view of the human soul: God is considered to be
   the one who enlivens each human being at the level of formal (or
   quasi-formal) causality. Significant drawbacks, however, are present in
   both approaches.

   Rahner's hominization theory on the face of things offers a reasonably
   coherent solution to the dilemma posed by evolution. But it does so at
   a cost. First, there is no good reason why the divine action that
   brings finite beings to transcend themselves should be reserved to
   individuals that are genetically identifiable as humans. Put in another
   way, the difference between human and non-human beings can only be
   quantitative, not qualitative; spirit would constitute simply a more
   evolved state of matter. Second, if divine efficient causality is what
   brings about the self-transcendence of finite beings, then the actions
   attributed to the beings in question may remain unrelated to their
   respective natures. This would involve a confusion between
   "instrumental" and "second" causality (see Autonomy). Thomas Aquinas
   teaches that in the order of creation, and specifically in that of the
   spirituality of the human soul: "Nulla actio convenit alicui rei, nisi
   per aliquod principium formaliter ei inhaerens —no action can be
   performed by a subject without any principle that is inherent in that
   same subject" (Summa Theologiae, I, q. 79, a. 4). And elsewhere: "non
   dicimus quod calor calefacit, sed calidum —we do not say that heat
   makes something hot, but that a certain hot body makes something else
   hot" (ibidem, q. 75, a. 2). That is, immaterial actions of whatever
   kind (knowing, loving, acting freely) can be meaningfully attributed to
   humans only if they derive from a proper immaterial substance, that is,
   the human soul. Otherwise they can only be attributed to some distinct
   immaterial reality, an external, common "agent intellect," for
   instance, or the Divinity itself. It would be more correct to say that
   the direct action of God on man at the level of primary causality
   involves the creation of the human soul, the unique form that makes it
   possible for humans to will, to know, to be open to God, etc.

   Likewise Pannenberg's position as regards the immortality and
   substantiality of the human soul does not give sufficient consistency
   to created reality as such. In a Christian context he is correct in
   considering God as the only one capable of granting immortality or
   permanence to the human being in its concrete lived identity. However,
   not unlike Rahner, he is mistaken in seeking out human identity (and
   thus immortality) only in the concrete history of the person, and not
   to the human subject of that history. Humans, before having a personal
   history and developing a concrete identity, were already human with a
   spiritual dignity written into their very being. In fact the doctrine
   of the immortality of the soul is not only meant to guarantee the
   identity of the singular history of each human being, but rather to
   ensure the metaphysical identity of their being human. Pannenberg's
   opposition between (eschatological) novelty and (Platonic) stability is
   problematic for the same reason. In the absence of a metaphysically
   stable subject, no novelty would be possible or meaningful, because any
   novelty would presuppose a discontinuity in respect of what was
   previously present. "Novelty" must be a novelty of something. The
   subject of such "novelty" in Pannenberg —certainly for as long as the
   intermediate period between death and resurrection lasts— could only be
   God himself, the objective Spirit, of which the individual human being
   (the "subjective spirit") would be a simple derivation or
   manifestation.

   A document of the Roman Catholic Church issued from Congregation for
   the Doctrine of Faith provides a brief but helpful summary of what the
   Christian theology should maintain about the human soul, framed within
   an eschatological context: "The Church affirms that a spiritual element
   survives and subsists after death, an element endowed with
   consciousness and will, so that the "human self" subsists. To designate
   this element, the Church uses the word 'soul,' the accepted term in the
   usage of Scripture and Tradition. Although not unaware that this term
   has various meanings in the Bible, the Church thinks that there is no
   valid reason for rejecting it; moreover, she considers that the use of
   some word as a vehicle is absolutely indispensable in order to support
   the faith of Christians" (Letter on Certain Questions concerning
   Eschatology, May 17, 1979). Both serious scientific endeavour and
   religious and philosophical reflection over the centuries, have led to
   the reality of the human soul as the living, spiritual, "informing"
   centre of each human being. Historically speaking it can be argued that
   whereas science insists primarily on the inseparability of body and
   soul, that is, on the "psychosomatic" unity of the human person,
   religion leans towards the distinctness of the soul from the body, and
   thus, including the possibility of favouring a certain dualism between
   the two. Christian doctrine, however, on the basis of the oneness of
   the creating act of God, teaches that the spiritual soul is the only
   form of the human composite, yet, in the light of the doctrine of final
   resurrection, it allows also for the possibility of a temporary
   survival of the soul separated from the body. Besides, Christian
   doctrine understands the immortal dignity of each human being in terms
   in direct creation of human souls by God, and on this basis
   unequivocally teaches the priority of the specifically spiritual
   co-principle of the human beings (cf. Schönborn, 1984).
   Read also
   Man, Origin and Nature
   Mind-Body Relationship
   Resurrection
   Spirit
   Documents of the Catholic Church related to the subject

   Abbreviations and complete titles of the documents

   Synod I of Toledo, DH 190; Leo I, Quam laudabiliter, DH 285; Anastasius
   II, Bonum atque iucundum, DH 360; DH 403; Synod of Braga, DH 456;
   Council of Vienne, DH 902; Lateran Council V, DH 1440; DH 2135; Gaudium
   et spes, 14; CDF, Letter on Certain Questions Concerning Eschatology,
   17.5.1979, EV 6, 1528-1549; ITC, Contemporary Questions on Eschatology,
   16.11.1991, EV 13, 448-572; John Paul II, General Audience, 27.5.1998.
   Bibliography

   Religion, Philosophy and Theology: E. ARBMAN, “Untersuchungen zur
   primitiven Seelenvorstellung mit besonderer Rucksicht auf Indien,” Le
   Monde Oriental 20 (1926), pp. 85-222; E. ARBMAN, “Untersuchungen zur
   primitiven Seelenvorstellung mit besonderer Rucksicht auf Indien,” Le
   Monde Oriental 21 (1927), pp. 1-185; E. BERTOLA, “Il problema
   dell’immortalità dell’anima nelle opere di Tommaso d’Aquino,” Rivista
   di filosofia neo-scolastica 65 (1973), pp. 248-302; M. BROWN, “Aquinas
   on the Resurrection of the Body,” Thomist 56 (1992), pp. 165-207; S.T.
   DAVIS, “Christian Belief in the Resurrection of the Body,” New
   Scholasticism 62 (1988), pp. 72-97; R.C. DALES, The Problem of the
   Rational Soul in the Thirteenth Century (Leiden - New York E.J. Brill,
   1995); M. ELIADE, “Soul,” in The Encyclopedia of Religion, edited by M.
   Eliade, vol. 13 (New York: Macmillan Co., 1987), pp. 426-465; C. FABRO,
   L’anima: introduzione al problema dell’uomo (Roma: Studium, 1955); A.
   FERNÁNDEZ, La escatología en el siglo II (Burgos: Aldecoa, 1979); D.R.
   FOSTER, “Aquinas on the Immateriality of the Intellect,” Thomist 57
   (1993), pp. 415-38; G. GRESHAKE, “‘Seele’ in der Geschichte der
   christlichen Eschatologie,” in Seele. Problembegriff christlicher
   Eschatologie, edited by R. Friedli and W. Breuning (Freiburg i.B.:
   Herder, 1986), pp. 107-58; G. GRESHAKE, G. LOHFINK, Naherwartung.
   Auferstehung. Unsterblichkeit (Freiburg im B.: Herder, 1975); V.
   GROSSI, Lineamenti di antropologia patristica (Roma: Borla, 1983); R.H.
   GUNDRY, Sôma in Biblical Theology with emphasis on Pauline anthropology
   (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976); A.G. HAMMAN, L’homme
   image de Dieu: essai d’une anthropologie chrétienne dans l’église des
   cinq premiers siècles (Paris: Desclée, 1987); H.-P. HASENFRATZ, Die
   Seele. Einfürhung in ein religiöse Grundphänomen (Zürich: Theologischer
   Verlag, 1986); C. HERMANN, Unsterblichkeit der Seele durch
   Auferstehung. Studien zu den anthropologischen Implikationen der
   Eschatologie (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1997); F. INCIARTE,
   “Der Begriff der Seele in der Philosophie des Aristoteles,” in Seele:
   ihre Wirklichkeit ihr Verhältnis zum Leib und zur menschlichen Person,
   edited. by K. Kremer (Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1984) pp. 46-65; K. JÖEL, Der
   Ursprung der Naturphilosophie aus dem Geiste der Mystik (Jena: E.
   Diederichs, 1906); A. LOBATO (ed.), “L’anima nell’antropologia di S.
   Tommaso d’Aquino,” atti del Congresso della Società internazionale S.
   Tommaso d’Aquino (Milano: Massimo, 1987); D. LYS, Néphésh, Histoire de
   l’âme dans la révélation d’Israël au sein des religions
   proche-orientales (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1959); R.R.
   MARETT, The Threshold of Religion (London Metheun, 1929); C.F.J.
   MARTIN, “On a Mistake Commonly Made in Accounts of Sixteenth-Century
   Discussions of the Immortality of the Soul,” American Catholic
   Philosophical Quarterly 69 (1995), pp. 29-37; J. MOREAU, L’âme du monde
   de Platon aux stoïciens (Hildesheim - New York: G. Olms, 1981^3; J.
   MOREAU, “L’homme et son âme selon S. Thomas d’Aquin,” Revue
   philosophique de Louvain 74 (1976), pp. 5-29; P. O’CALLAGHAN, “La
   persona umana tra filosofia e teologia,” Annales Theologici 13 (1999),
   pp. 71-105; P. O’CALLAGHAN, Fides Christi. The Justification Debate
   (Dublin - Portland: Four Courts, 1997); A. ORBE, “La definición del
   hombre en la teología del siglo II,” Gregorianum 48 (1967), pp.
   522-576; F.J.C. NUYENS, L’Évolution de la Psychologie d’Aristote
   (Louvain: Éditions de l'Institut supérieure de philosophie, 1973); W.
   PANNENBERG, Systematic Theology, vol. 3 (Edinburgh - Grand Rapids, MI:
   T. & T. Clark - Eerdmans, 1998); A.C. PEGIS, St. Thomas and the problem
   of the soul in the thirteenth century (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of
   Mediaeval Studies, 1976); A.C. PEGIS, “The Separated Soul and its
   Nature in St. Thomas,” in St. Thomas Aquinas 1274-1974. Commemorative
   Studies, ed. by A.A. Maurer et al., 2 vols. (Toronto: Pontifical
   Institute of Medieval Studies, 1974), vol. 1, pp. 131-158; J. PIEPER,
   Tod und Unsterblichkeit (München: Kösel, 1968); M. POHLENZ, Der
   hellenische Mensch (Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1947); A.
   PORCARELLI, “Il problema del destino dell’uomo nei miti greci dell’età
   arcana,” Sacra Doctrina 43 (1998), pp. 72-116; C. POZO, Teología del
   más allá (Madrid: BAC, 1980); R. REYNA, “On the Soul: A Philosophical
   Exploration of the Active Intellect in Averroes, Aristotle and
   Aquinas,” Thomist 36 (1972), pp. 131-194; E. ROHDE, Psyche. Seelencult
   und Unsterblichkeitsglaube der Griechen (1891), 2 vols. (Darmstadt:
   Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1961); E. SCHWEITZER ET AL.,
   Psyché, in TDNT, edited by G. Kittel - G. Friedrich, vol. IX (1984),
   pp. 608-660; K. STOCK, Seele VI: Theologisch, in Theologische
   Realenzyklopädie, ed. by G. Krause and G. Müller (Berlin - New York: De
   Gruyter, 1999), vol. 30, pp. 759-773; E.B. TYLOR, Primitive Culture
   (1871), (London: Murray, 1929); C. VON SCHÖNBORN, “L’homme créé par
   Dieu: le fondement de la dignité de l’homme,” Gregorianum 65 (1984),
   pp. 337-363; C. WESTERMANN, Genesis 1-11, 3 vols. (Minneapolis:
   Fortress, 1984); H.W. WOLFF, Anthropologie des Alten Testaments
   (München: Kaiser, 1973); N. WICKI, Die Lehre von der himmlischen
   Seligkeit in der mittelalterlichen Scholastik von Petrus Lombardus bis
   Thomas von Aquin (Freiburg: Freiburg Universitätsverlag, 1954); E.
   ZELLER, Grundriss der Geschichte der griechischen Philosophie (Leipzig:
   O.R. Reisland, 1883).

   Interdisciplinary aspects related to science: E. BONCINELLI, Il
   cervello, la mente e l’anima (Milano: Mondadori, 1999); L. BORGHI,
   “L’antropologia tomista e il body-mind problem. Alla ricerca di un
   contributo mancante,” Acta Philosophica 1 (1992), pp. 279-292; M.
   BUNGE, The Mind-Body Problem. A Psychobiological Approach (Oxford:
   Oxford University Press, 1980); J.-P. CHANGEAUX, L’Homme neuronal
   (Paris: Fayard 1983); J.-P. CHANGEAUX, A. CONNES, Matière à pensée
   (Paris: Odile Jacob, 1989); F.H.C. CRICK, The Astonishing Hypothesis
   (London: Simon and Schuster, 1994); D.C. DENNETT, Consciousness
   Explained (Boston,MA - Toronto: Little Brown & Co., 1995); G. DEL RE,
   “The Question of the Soul,” La Nuova Critica 30 (1997), pp. 75-98;J.C.
   ECCLES, Evolution of the Brain. Creation of the Self (London - New
   York: Routledge, 1989); G.M. EDELMAN, Neural Darwinism. The Theory of
   Neuronal Group Selection (New York: Basic Books, 1987); G.M. EDELMAN,
   Topobiology. An Introduction to Molecular Embryology (New York: Basic
   Books, 1988); H. FEIGL, “The ‘Mental’ and the ‘Physical’,” in Concepts,
   theories and MBP (Mind-Body Problem), ed. by H. Feigl, M. Scriven, G.
   Maxwell (Minneapolis: Minnesota Univ. Press, 1958), pp. 370-497; A.
   GARDEIL, “L’évolutionisme et les principes de S. Thomas,” Revue
   Thomiste 1 (1893), pp. 27-45, 316-327, 725-737; H.E. GARDNER, The
   Mind’s New Science. A History of the Cognitive Revolution (New York:
   Basic Books, 1984); P. GEACH, God and the Soul (London: Routledge &
   Kegan Paul, 1969); S.J. HEIMS, The Cybernetics Group (Cambridge, MA -
   London: The MIT Press, 1991); M.D. LEROY, L’évolution restreinte aux
   espèces organiques (Paris-Lyons: Delhomme & Briguet, 1891); D.M.
   MACKAY, Brains, Machines and Persons (London: Collins, 1980); J.-M.
   MALDAMÉ, “Sciences cognitives, neuroscience et âme humaine,” Revue
   Thomiste 98 (1998), pp. 282-322; R. PENROSE, Shadows of the Mind. A
   Search for the Missing Science of Consciousness (Oxford - New York:
   Oxford University Press, 1994); D. PINKAS, La matérialité de l’esprit.
   La conscience, le langage et la machine dans les théories
   contemporaines de l’esprit (Paris: La Découverte, 1995); K.R. POPPER,
   J.C. ECCLES, The Self and Its Brain. An Argument for Interactionism, 3
   vols. (Berlin - Heidelberg: Springer, 1977); K. RAHNER, “Die
   Hominisation als theologische Frage,” in Das problem der Hominisation:
   über den biologischen Ursprung des Menschen, ed. by K. Rahner and P.
   Overhage (Freiburg i.B.: Herder, 1961), pp. 13-90; R. RORTY, Philosophy
   and the Mirror of Nature (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,
   1980); G. RYLE, The Concept of Mind (London: Hutchinson, 1949); J.R.
   SEARLE, The Rediscovery of the Mind (Cambridge, MA - London: The MIT
   Press, 1992); J.R. SEARLE, “Deux biologistes et un physicien en quête
   de l’âme. Crick, Penrose et Edelman passés au scalpel de la critique
   philosophique,” La Recherche (1998), pp. 62-77; J. SEIFERT, Das
   Leib-Seel-Problem und die gegenwärtige philosophische Diskussion. Eine
   systematisch-kritische Analyse (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche
   Buchgesellschaft, 1989^2); B.F. SKINNER, J.G. HOLLAND, The Analysis of
   Behavior (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1961); A.E. WILDER SMITH, The Creation
   of Life. A Cybernetic Approach to Evolution (Wheaton, IL: Harold Shaw
   Publishers, 1970); J.A. ZAHM, Evolution and Dogma (Chicago: D. H.
   McBride & co., 1896).


   Copyright © Interdisciplinary Encyclopedia of Religion and Science
   ISSN: 2037-2329 and the author.  No part of this article may be
   reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted without the
   prior permission of the Editors.  To refer to the content of this
   article, quote: INTERS – Interdisciplinary Encyclopedia of Religion and
   Science, edited by G. Tanzella-Nitti and A. Strumia, www.inters.org
   Pontificia Universitas Sanctae Crucis
   © Interdisciplinary Documentation on Religion and Science 2003 - 2025
   Editorial Office Address: via dei Pianellari, 41 - 00186 Rome, Italy
   General Postal Address: P.zza sant'Apollinare, 49  - 00186 Rome, Italy
   tel ++39 06.68.16.44.88
   disf.org in italiano
   [twcf_logo_icon_dark.png]
   Templeton World Charity Foundation
