   #Kindred Spirit Magazine » Feed Kindred Spirit Magazine » Comments Feed
   Kindred Spirit Magazine » Soul Family and Earth Family Connections
   Comments Feed oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML)

   Skip to content

     * About
          + Contributors
          + Contact us
     * Magazine
          + Shop products
          + Competitions
     * Blog
          + Consciousness
          + Divination
          + Earth Wisdom
          + Food for the soul
          + Interviews & Profiles
          + Natural Health
          + Psychic studies
          + Self-Development
     * Newsletter
     * Advertise
          + Classifieds

     * About
          + Contributors
          + Contact us
     * Magazine
          + Shop products
          + Competitions
     * Blog
          + Consciousness
          + Divination
          + Earth Wisdom
          + Food for the soul
          + Interviews & Profiles
          + Natural Health
          + Psychic studies
          + Self-Development
     * Newsletter
     * Advertise
          + Classifieds

   Cart

   Accelerate your Spiritual Development.Join the Watkins Wisdom Academy
   and learn from the best spiritual teachers in the world.
   www.watkinsmagazine.com
   Leah Russell7 min

Soul Family and Earth Family Connections

     * October 16, 2023

   by Claire Broad ‘The reason it hurts so much to separate is because our
   souls are connected’ – Nicholas Sparks  As an eternal soul, you
   experience heavenly states of being when you vibrate in harmony and
   love with other souls. Your soul instinctively knows this and leads you
   toward other souls with whom you can share soul connection. Your soul
   strives for the experience of connection because it will lead you to
   the experience of love – love is the soul, and the soul is divine.  The
   paradox in our world is that many of us are not yet able to embody
   heavenly states of pure love. Seeing the eternal soul of someone you
   love, therefore, reflected back at you in soul connection is a powerful
   way to recognize the truth of your own eternal soul. For this reason,
   soul connections are the most impactful relationships in our lives.
   Your soul will guide you to both challenging and harmonious soul
   connections, in order for you to discover as much about who you are not
   (temporary, fearful and destructible) as to who you are (eternal,
   loving and indestructible).  I’m here to help you to identify the
   different soul connections in your own life, and their purposes. I
   start here by teaching about Soul Family and Earth Family, and the
   differences between the two; as well as explaining why these
   connections can be highly challenging in their own ways. Soul Family
   and Earth Family form the foundations for many of the key soul lessons
   you face on your soul journey in this lifetime when it comes to
   relationships, and so are hugely important. We don’t always experience
   every type of soul connection that exists in a lifetime, but we are
   almost certain to experience Soul Family or Earth Family dynamics in
   our lives, and often the two come together.

Your Soul Family

   Your Soul Family are those souls within your soul group that, through
   common experience or shared interest, resonate so harmoniously in
   frequency with you that they blend ever closer to your soul – more so
   than those in your larger soul group. We term these souls ‘Soul
   Family’, and these will likely be the souls you choose to incarnate
   into the physical world with many times over, because of the love
   shared between you. Soul Family connections are supportive, helping you
   to learn from all that life can show you within the security of knowing
   others will be there to help you along the way.  Soul Family members
   are the relationships we enjoy a deep and loving connection with, the
   people in our lives that just ‘get’ us. Even if you are completely
   different in personality to other members of your Soul Family, you will
   still vibe high with them because you resonate together at the level of
   the soul (which is energy). Soul family connections largely make for
   joy-filled relationships. They are often playful and usually calm, even
   when disagreements happen or conflict occurs (because of course, we are
   still human at the end of the day, and no relationship is perfect in
   this world). As an analogy, if we were to think of Soul Family as a
   group of different individual musical notes, these souls when played
   together would vibrate in such a manner that they would create a
   harmonious chord.  Within your Soul Family, you will also form soul
   connections that resonate so similarly to you in frequency that if we
   go back to the music analogy, these souls would be the same note as
   you, just on a different octave. These are our Soulmate connections.
   Within your Soul Family, it is Soulmates that usually come along less
   than a handful of times in a life. They are the souls that you would
   find it the hardest to live without in this world. Soulmates may
   incarnate as husbands or wives, biological twins or very close
   siblings, or lifelong best friends. You resonate so closely together
   that these are the souls we can most likely share heavenly experiences
   of pure soul love with. For that reason, they are also the soul
   connections we most often experience a sense of being ‘at one’ with. As
   part of your Soul Family but in a subcategory of its own, is also a
   soul sharing exactly the same soul frequency or soul blueprint as you.
   In the analogy of the musical notes, this soul doesn’t vibrate in a
   harmonic chord with you (like Soul Family and Soulmates do), because
   this soul resonates as exactly the same musical soul note, on the same
   musical octave. If this soul played its note at the same time as you
   played yours, those listening would hear one note. We call these ‘Twin
   Souls’ or ‘Twin Flames’. Finally, I should explain that your Soul
   Family exists alongside other soul families within your larger soul
   group – just as your soul group exists alongside other soul groups.
   These united soul groups make up one infinite pool of souls in the form
   of one universal consciousness, of which you are an important part.
   Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882), the American philosopher, poet,
   essayist and lecturer, named this unified collective grouping of soul
   groups as the ‘Over-Soul’, a term that remains popular today.

Signs and indications of Soul Family connection

     * You vibe high and spending time together is joyful
     * There is a deep sense of connection between you and an unspoken
       love that is simply an accepted given
     * You feel nurtured and supported – you can ask for advice and help
       should you need it and it will always be given
     * These are “your” people
     * Any disagreements are always worked through without damaging the
       love in the relationship
     * You have things in common or shared outlooks, morals and values
     * The idea of this person dying or leaving your life is something you
       don’t ever want to consider
     * You choose to make time for each other and miss one another when
       you spend too much time apart
     * You feel a sense of security with them.
     * Unconditional love is shared between you



Soul Families vs Earth Families

   I just explained that souls unite in the spirit world depending on how
   harmoniously they resonate energetically with one another, and that
   within your larger soul group there are other Soul Families existing
   alongside yours. Your soul may choose to incarnate into a biological
   Earth Family with souls from a different Soul Family to your own. You
   do this in order to benefit from the opportunities it creates – you can
   learn more sometimes from those who are different to you than when you
   only journey with souls that see from the same perspective as you do.
   When this occurs, it is commonly challenging because family members
   find it hard to relate well to one another. For example, soul learning
   is gained within Earth Family dynamics when you discover your Earth
   Family members are not those you turn to in life for support. They
   instead trigger you to foster independence and self-empowerment,
   because you must learn to stand on your own two feet. In this respect,
   Earth Family offer the opposite side of the coin in life experience to
   Soul Family.  It is common for Soul Family members to birth into the
   world at varying times to one another, and return to the spirit world
   in a staggered fashion. That way, there will always be Soul Family
   members on both sides of life, ready and able to offer support and love
   to one another. Soul Family members therefore might incarnate as
   friends, teachers, students, work colleagues or carers in this
   lifetime, as much as biological family members. Sometimes, a soul
   actually requests an Earth Family dynamic without any Soul Family
   members present for maximum soul growth opportunity. At other times,
   there may be both a mixture of Soul Family members and souls that are
   not Soul Family members in a biological family. Of course, sometimes a
   biological earth family will consist entirely of Soul Family members
   too; it depends on the best interests of both the individual souls and
   the collective. Earth Family dynamics are incredibly important because
   they allow for souls to interact with other souls from different soul
   groups and Soul Families, developing new connections over time.

The purpose of Soul Family in earth family dynamics

   Soul Family is about the degree to which we can bring unconditional
   pure soul love into this physical world and embody it. Even when you
   make mistakes or are hurtful unintentionally toward other Soul Family
   members, you learn that you are loved no matter what. In return, you
   offer the same loyalty to those in your Soul Family because you also
   love them unconditionally. This is the love that heals. Incarnating
   with Soul Family members as part of your biological family provides a
   nurturing environment in which you can learn important life lessons.
   Often, Soul Family in the same biological family experience massive
   physical challenges or loss. For example, a family member may have
   severe disabilities or health issues. Or, because they resonate
   together so well, family members may work together in business, which
   brings its own challenges – maybe a collapse of the family business
   occurs, or the loss of property. The challenge will require Soul Family
   members to pull together, no matter what. The emphasis could also be on
   collective experience and collective growth, not just an individual’s
   soul evolution. In these instances, the challenges faced can be
   especially great, requiring Soul Family members to pull together as a
   team and to learn what it means to unite as a collective. This mirrors
   the way Soul Family exists in the spirit dimensions.

Soul Family and Earth Family Connections Provide Soul Lesson Foundations

   The spirit guides teach that there is a difference between Soul Family
   and biological Earth Family dynamics, and we learn so much from both.
   Soul Family members are the closest and most significant relationships
   in our lives. These supportive connections enrich our lives, and the
   bonds of love we share are eternal. We journey through life with our
   Soul Family members ever by our side, whether that is in physical form
   or when our beloved Soul Family members have returned to the spirit
   world. Soul Family are the souls within your soul group that, through
   common experience or shared interest, resonate so harmoniously in
   frequency with you. In contrast, Earth Family members are often
   emotionally distant, non-supportive relationships, and may challenge us
   immensely. They force us to stand strong on our own feet and grow in
   self-reliance and self-resilience. We have to find the strength of our
   own soul within. We function materially with our Earth Family members,
   but we don’t vibe high. They show us love is soul deep and not a
   physical phenomenon. People in Earth Family dynamics may feel guilty
   because deep down they know that should an Earth Family member cross
   back to the spirit world, their grief would not be too traumatic. In
   contrast, our Soul Family members are the soul connections we would
   hate to live without. When a Soul Family member returns to the spirit
   world, the grief we experience is immense.  We must learn to search
   within ourselves for the love we share, to realize that because love
   (being soul energy and emotion) is not a physical thing, we can never
   lose the love we share with a Soul Family member. Love was never
   physical in the first place. Soul Family connections are eternal. You
   will see your loved ones again because love, like the soul, never dies.
     This is an extract from Heaven Sent: Soul Lessons from the Afterlife
   by Claire Broad (£14.99, published by Welbeck Balance).   About the
   book:

   Claire Broad, accredited medium and spiritual teacher explains how, as
   a conduit between two worlds, she is uniquely placed to receive and
   communicate wisdom about our soul's journey from the deceased and her
   guides.

   From soul families, to soulmates and twin flames, there are many
   expressions of soul connections, each one perfectly designed to lead us
   back to pure unconditional love and our soul within. Even the most
   difficult and painful relationships serve a higher spiritual purpose,
   teaching us to live fearlessly, love without condition, have compassion
   for all souls on Earth, as well as enjoy a life of greater joy, purpose
   and meaning. Lessons from the afterlife prepare us for our own
   inevitable physical death and the soul's journey back to the spirit
   world.

Share:

     * FB
     * TW
     * G+
     * Pi

   In Conversation with Artist Jackie Philip
     * Consciousness
     * Interviews & Profiles

In Conversation with Artist Jackie Philip

   By Jackie Philip / 27 December, 2025
   As the cycles of the year turn toward the winter solstice, the earth
   enters her darkest night, that ancient still...
   Read More
   2026 Horoscopes: Your Year-Ahead in the Stars
     * Divination

2026 Horoscopes: Your Year-Ahead in the Stars

   By Demian Allan / 26 December, 2025
   We now come to the end of the 2025 cycle, welcoming a new year and all
   that it promises. These...
   Read More
   Feng Shui Your Way to a Calm and Happy Holiday
     * Earth Wisdom
     * Natural Health

Feng Shui Your Way to a Calm and Happy Holiday

   By Kimberley Gallagher / 19 December, 2025
   Feng Shui is a powerful way to create harmony, joy and positive energy
   during celebrations and holidays. Whether it’s Hanukkah,...
   Read More
   KS Throwback: In Conversation With Shirley MacLaine
     * Interviews & Profiles

KS Throwback: In Conversation With Shirley MacLaine

   By Kate Osborne / 14 December, 2025
   In this excerpt from a full interview published in issue 91 of Kindred
   Spirit, KS Editor Kate Osborne speaks to...
   Read More
   A Green Witch’s Yuletide
     * Earth Wisdom

A Green Witch’s Yuletide

   By Tudorbeth / 12 December, 2025
   Winter is the time of year that gardens and the earth sleep, but it
   also brings festive magic and nature...
   Read More
   Dreamwalkers: The Invisible Warriors
     * Consciousness
     * self help

Dreamwalkers: The Invisible Warriors

   By Andromeda Lesnaya / 10 December, 2025
   A dreamwalker is a descended interdimensional being. You are not a
   dreamwalker in a single lifetime; you are a dreamwalker...
   Read More
   Yoga Transformed my Life – Now I’m Creating a Space for other Men
     * Interviews & Profiles
     * Natural Health
     * self-development

Yoga Transformed my Life – Now I’m Creating a Space for other Men

   By Josh Sparks / 7 December, 2025
   Josh Sparks, founder of chiropractic and holistic wellness centre
   Natural Healing in Dorset, was a teenager struggling with drugs and...
   Read More
   Rituals of Awareness: How Thelema Transforms the Ordinary into the
   Sacred
     * Consciousness
     * recommended

Rituals of Awareness: How Thelema Transforms the Ordinary into the Sacred

   By Marco Visconti / 5 December, 2025
   Every few decades, a generation of seekers rediscovers the word
   ‘magick' and wonders what it truly means. Not the stage...
   Read More
   Behind the Deck: The Unicorn Path Oracle
     * Divination
     * Interviews & Profiles

Behind the Deck: The Unicorn Path Oracle

   By D M Forster / 30 November, 2025
   Shortly after I had the idea for this oracle deck and the pegasuses
   (flying horses) and unicorns came to life...
   Read More
   Numerology Forecast for December
     * Divination

Numerology Forecast for December

   By Sonia Ducie / 28 November, 2025
   To discover your personal Life Path Number, write down all the digits
   in your date of birth and add them...
   Read More

   transformationalbreath.co.uk

   Book Now

   Join Now

Come and join us as we explore the world of holistic and spiritual wellness.

Accelerate your Spiritual Development

   Join the Academy and learn from some of the best spiritual
   and wellbeing teachers in the world
   watkinswisdomacademy.com

Accelerate your Spiritual Development

   Join the Academy and learn from some of the best spiritual
   and wellbeing teachers in the world
   watkinswisdomacademy.com

Accelerate your Spiritual Development

   Join the Academy and learn from some of the best spiritual
   and wellbeing teachers in the world
   watkinswisdomacademy.com

Subscribe To our newsletter!

Come and join us as we explore the world of holistic and spiritual wellness.

   Your subscription could not be saved. Please try again!
   Your subscription has been successful!
   ____________________
   (BUTTON) Subscribe!
   ____________________

Come and join us on our socials!

   Facebook X-twitter Linkedin Instagram

     * Magazine
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of service
     * Contact us

     * Magazine
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of service
     * Contact us

   Kindred Spirit Magazine © 2026.All rights reserved.

   Buy a magazine
   About

   About Us

   Subscribe

   Meet the Team

   Contributors

   Contact Us
   Magazine

   Awards

   Competitions
   Freebies

   PDFS
   Blog

   View All

   Consciousness

   Divination

   Earth Wisdom

   Food for the soul

   Interviews & profiles

   Natural Health

   Psychic studies

   Self-development
   Newsletter
   Advertise

   Advertise KS

   Classifieds
   Subscribe
   Meetup Events
   Cart

   Search ____________________ (BUTTON)
