   #alternate mindbodygreen RSS Feed mindbodygreen RSS Feed mindbodygreen
   Food RSS Feed mindbodygreen Health RSS Feed mindbodygreen Lifestyle RSS
   Feed mindbodygreen Meditation RSS Feed mindbodygreen Mindfulness RSS
   Feed mindbodygreen Planet RSS Feed mindbodygreen Relationships RSS Feed
   mindbodygreen Meditation RSS Feed mindbodygreen Spirituality RSS Feed
   mindbodygreen Personal Growth RSS Feed mindbodygreen Integrative Health
   RSS Feed mindbodygreen Mental Health RSS Feed mindbodygreen Women's
   Health RSS Feed mindbodygreen Healthy Weight RSS Feed mindbodygreen
   Recipes RSS Feed mindbodygreen Functional Food RSS Feed mindbodygreen
   Food Trends RSS Feed mindbodygreen Outdoors RSS Feed mindbodygreen
   Motivation RSS Feed mindbodygreen Routines RSS Feed mindbodygreen
   Recovery RSS Feed mindbodygreen Friendships RSS Feed mindbodygreen Love
   RSS Feed mindbodygreen Sex RSS Feed mindbodygreen Parenting RSS Feed
   mindbodygreen Home RSS Feed mindbodygreen Beauty RSS Feed mindbodygreen
   Travel RSS Feed mindbodygreen Wellness Trends RSS Feed mindbodygreen
   Change-Makers RSS Feed mindbodygreen Off-the-Grid RSS Feed
   mindbodygreen Climate Change RSS Feed mindbodygreen Nature RSS Feed

   Skip to Content
   Accessibility Statement

   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) READ (BUTTON) LEARN (BUTTON) LISTEN (BUTTON) SHOP
   envelope-icon (BUTTON) Search
   (BUTTON) Account
   (BUTTON) READ (BUTTON) LEARN (BUTTON) LISTEN (BUTTON) SHOP

   Close Banner
   Spirituality

Have You Been Called An Old Soul? Here's What That Really Means

   Sarah Regan
   Author:
   Sarah Regan
   January 24, 2021
   Sarah Regan
   mbg Spirituality & Relationships Editor
   By Sarah Regan
   mbg Spirituality & Relationships Editor
   Sarah Regan is a Spirituality & Relationships Editor, and a registered
   yoga instructor. She received her bachelor's in broadcasting and mass
   communication from SUNY Oswego, and lives in Buffalo, New York.
   January 24, 2021
   We carefully vet all products and services featured on mindbodygreen
   using our commerce guidelines. Our selections are never influenced by
   the commissions earned from our links.

   Are you a curious, wise, or all-around calm person? You might just be
   an old soul. Whether you've been called it before or always had a
   feeling you were, what does being an old soul really mean? Here, we
   dive into the true meaning, plus, the signs to look out for that you
   could be an old soul.

What does "old soul" really mean?

   It's likely you know an old soul when you meet one. They probably seem
   wise beyond their years, mature, grounded, and aren't interested in
   superficial things. According to intuitive counselor Randi Merzon, the
   concept of the old soul is inspired by the idea that our bodies are
   containers for spirit, and an old soul "is someone who continues to
   reincarnate in order to heal or complete karmic agreements."

   Of course, depending on what you believe and how you relate to
   spirituality, another way of thinking about old souls is the idea that
   we're all perhaps different incarnations of universal life force, and
   those old souls are simply tapped into that wisdom on a deeper level
   (and from an earlier age) during that lifetime.

   As spiritual guide and author of Sacred Landscapes of the Soul, Karen
   Brailsford tells mbg, "I believe there's a timelessness or eternality
   we all have access to—this innate wisdom and core truth. In some ways,
   one might say we're all old souls, and maybe in different lifetimes
   we're exploring different aspects of that."

Is it a good thing to be an old soul?

   It's usually a compliment to be referred to as an old soul, as it
   implies grace and wisdom. But there can be downsides to being mature
   beyond your years. As Merzon explains, "No one enjoys being a newbie,
   but in fact, the benefit of being a new soul is that they carry around
   a lot less karma."

   She adds that old souls come into this life with an agenda to
   experience and complete karma, while new souls "want to make form out
   of light," and "experience what it's like to be a being in a body." As
   such, the new souls' experience is a bit more lighthearted, where being
   an old soul can feel heavy. But in addition to that, because the old
   soul comes to this life with more experience and understanding, they're
   able to handle obstacles and challenges with greater clarity.

   And going back to Brailsford's point, it comes down to what the new
   versus old soul is experiencing in this life. A new soul "wants to be
   fresh and new and maybe have a more hedonistic lifestyle," while an old
   soul "wants to go into the depths and learn." Old souls may also feel
   somewhat isolated, as they can see through much of the illusion and
   separation in modern culture.

11 characteristics of old souls:

   1.

You have an inquisitive, curious mind.

   Old souls very much prioritize truth and wisdom. As such, they often
   have curious minds about what's happening in the world and internally
   "but not in a superficial way," Brailsford notes. "Whether it's world
   events or your relationship with a family member or friend, it's the
   idea of being curious about what's emerging and what one might learn or
   cultivate through the experience," she explains.
   2.

You can see the big picture.

   If you're an old soul, you're likely able to see beyond appearances,
   Brailsford says. You're probably able to let things roll off your back
   easier, and you're less likely to be triggered by certain things. "I'm
   not saying on a day-to-day basis you're not human and don't get angry,"
   she adds, "but overall, you're able to step back and see the bigger
   picture, whether immediately or a little later, and have a sense of
   what it was all about."
   3.

You may feel like a bit of an outsider.

   According to Merzon, being an old soul can make it difficult to form
   meaningful connections, at least when you're young. "If you're an old
   soul and are still chronologically young, it might take a while to find
   your tribe," she says. And as Brailsford adds, "They might feel like an
   outlier, and they may initially feel that they're alone in this."
   4.

...but you know your fellow old souls when you meet them.

   While it can be difficult to get along with everyone when you're an old
   soul, Brailsford is quick to note that in the long run, old souls are
   actually good at finding their fellow kindred spirits. "A true old soul
   realizes they can't be the only one. Old souls are looking out for one
   another, they're trying to find one another, so they're trying to make
   that connection because they realize there's a connection to be had."
   This is where you see those instantaneous soul connections that run
   very deep.
   5.

You feel deeply connected to everything.

   Not only do old souls feel deeply connected to God, spirit, the
   universe—whatever it is they call it—but they also feel that with
   nature, the people in their lives, and even strangers. "An old soul has
   a sense of connection to the universe and therefore to other souls,"
   Brailsford says, adding, "We probably have that connection to everyone,
   but maybe it doesn't show up in this lifetime."
   6.

You go against the status quo.

   Because old souls can see the big picture and beyond many of the basic
   structures that govern our reality, they like to do things their own
   way. "Old souls are rebellious," Brailsford notes. "They don't just
   think outside of the box—they intuit that the boxes don't even exist
   [...] There's a skepticism, a sense of understanding that everything
   they've been shown isn't necessarily the case, and they're going to
   seek to find their own truth."
   7.

You're wise beyond your years.

   From an early age, you may have been told you're wise beyond your
   years. Perhaps you've always felt you were more mature or understanding
   than your peers, especially when you were young. As Merzon explains it,
   "There is a knowing that they have been around the block before. You
   may recognize an 'old soul' even in a newborn. Their spirit's wisdom is
   written over their entire body."
   8.

You're not materialistic.

   One of those basic structures that we touched on previously would be
   materialism. Simply put, old souls are not concerned with it. They have
   a sense that "we're living in this material world but there's something
   more important, and perhaps the things we've been taught in school, or
   by our parents, or society, aren't necessarily true," Brailsford says.
   9.

Your inner world is more important than the outer.

   Not to say you don't care about the outer world, but for old souls,
   their inner growth, journey, and relationship to themselves and spirit
   are often of utmost importance. "The soul is inside, and it's about
   going within," Brailsford notes. You probably spend good amounts of
   time in reflection, deeply pondering your experiences and life lessons.
   10.

You have a particular gift from the past.

   Were you always inclined to the violin for seemingly no reason? Or
   maybe you have a proclivity for baking, even though you never baked
   with anyone in your family. "Having a particular gift, in a particular
   field out of the blue, whether it's an instrument or career or even
   place," Brailsford says, is a sign of an old soul. "There's this sense
   of having a knowing about that thing, that you've done this before."
   11.

You often need to recharge.

   And lastly, these deeply contemplative folks often need to "reset their
   batteries," so to speak. "They're probably drawn to meditation and
   solitude," Brailsford notes. "It's not that they don't enjoy people's
   company, but they know there are certain times they have to go within.
   They're not living just an external life."

Where these traits come from.

   The more spiritual understanding of where these traits come from
   relates to reincarnation and past lives. As Merzon says, "It's like
   getting older in a way, where we have experiences and we keep growing
   and building on them." She compares being born to going on a trip—a
   trip where many forget their luggage. Old souls don't forget their
   luggage, "bringing all of their information and experience with them
   into each incarnation," she says.

   Another way to look at it is to consider that we all had these traits
   once upon a time, until society told us otherwise. "We come into this
   world fully aware and awakened," Brailsford says. "It's often society,
   our parents, and culture that makes us forget. The journey becomes
   about unlearning these things."

   Other explanations would include things like a high degree of empathy
   or intuition, making one more tuned in to the bigger picture and their
   sense of being. Children who have dealt with trauma may also exhibit
   traits of old souls, as adverse childhood experiences forced them to
   grow up faster than their peers.

How to thrive as an old soul.

   While being wise and über-spiritual may sound great, as mentioned, it
   does come with some difficulties. Whether that be finding your soul
   family or learning how to balance your inner and outer worlds, there
   are ways old souls can be sure to thrive.

   "Surrounding yourself with people who are like-minded, in terms of
   being aware and open, is really supportive," Brailsford notes. And in
   addition to that, she emphasizes the importance of striking a balance
   between wisdom and lightheartedness. "Take delight in synchronicity and
   coincidence, and bring a playful energy to life," she says. "I think
   that helps one thrive—being lighthearted about it all. Hold the space
   of contemplation and deep thought, and also hold the space of levity
   and playfulness."

   And of course, given an old soul's rebellious nature, it will be
   imperative for them to figure out a lifestyle that feels fulfilling and
   supportive. As Merzon notes, "I believe an old soul has the ability to
   claim themselves more fully. They want to tailor their life and
   experiences to something that really resonates with them in present
   time."

The bottom line.

   There are so many ways we can think about souls, old and new. Whether
   we're all varied incarnations of the same soul, or there really are
   souls that are younger versus newer, the bottom line is, most of us can
   imagine what kind of person an "old soul" is and what traits those
   people embody. From deep intuition to a certain stillness in their
   presence, these folks have clearly learned a thing or two early on,
   making them wise and deeply spiritual people.

Read+

   HealthFoodMovementLifestyleMindfulnessRelationshipsPlanet

Learn+

   Health Coaching+nutrition & longevity+Peri/menopause+

Listen+

   mindbodygreen podcastclean beauty school podcast

Shop+

   Manage SubscriptionsTrack OrdersTake the quizContactAbout Us
   © 2009 - 2026 mindbodygreen LLC. All rights reserved.

   *These statements have not been evaluated by the Food and Drug
   Administration. This product is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure
   or prevent any disease.
   JobsTerms of SaleTerms of UseDisclaimerPrivacy PolicyReturn
   PolicyAccessibilityAd ChoicesData CollectionEditorial Process (BUTTON)
   Cookie Settings
