   #Katrina Kenison » Feed Katrina Kenison » Comments Feed Katrina Kenison
   » soul work Comments Feed oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML) JSON

     * home
     * about
          + watch my videos
          + press
     * books
          + get signed copies
          + get signed bookplates
     * events
     * contact
          +
          +
          +
     * Search ____________________ Search

   Katrina Kenison

   celebrating the gift of each ordinary day

     * Soul Work
     * Parenting
     * Writing & Reading
     * Hearth & Home

   Home » soul work

soul work

   You know how it is. The dishes need washing, the houseplants are
   wilting, the emails have piled up, the kids are needy, and the dog is
   scratching at the door to go out. There is no end to the to-do list, no
   reward or revelation to be found at the bottom of the laundry hamper,
   no moment in the day when life feels entirely manageable, tidy, and
   complete.

   And yet, this, I’m pretty sure, is where soul work actually begins –
   right here, right now, in the midst of the mess.

   http://www.dreamstime.com/royalty-free-stock-photo-dirty-dishes-image24
   147575
   http://www.dreamstime.com/royalty-free-stock-photo-dirty-dishes-image24
   147575

   Soul work is about finding the sacred in the everyday stuff of life,
   about bringing spirituality home to roost in the nooks and crannies of
   ordinary days spent doing ordinary things. It is about trusting that
   wherever you are is exactly where you’re meant to be– even when you’re
   up to your hips in life’s challenges.

   Years ago, as I sought to become the kind of mother I aspired to be, I
   realized that simply making a commitment to be present for my family
   was in itself a demanding spiritual practice. My first book, Mitten
   Strings for God, grew out of the challenge I set myself: to clear some
   quiet space in which our souls could grow. (Over a hundred thousand
   copies and nine translations later, it’s clear I wasn’t the only one
   seeking to restore quality and stillness to overcrowded days and lives
   too often spent on the run.) After all, true intimacy — with our
   children, with our partners, with ourselves — requires both intention
   and inspiration; it takes a certain rigor just to show up and stay put,
   again and again, come what may and no matter what.

   Slowing down, feeling my feelings, making some kind of peace with
   uncertainty, I began to view my own ordinary life through fresh eyes.
   Despite the upheavals and transformations of the teenage years, the
   lessons I most needed to learn were still about being exactly where I
   was, about resisting the temptation to run off elsewhere in search of
   more meaning, more experience, more connection, more wisdom, more
   anything.

   geese2 geese2

   All I really needed to do was pay closer attention to the life I
   already had. What I discovered, of course, is that there is indeed
   something holy about attending to fleeting moments, and even to mundane
   tasks, with exquisite care. The Gift of an Ordinary Day was the title
   of my second book, but soon the words took on a life of their own,
   becoming a kind of mantra, a reminder that grace and beauty are found
   right at hand, in the unvarnished moments of everyday experience. For
   it’s by paying attention to our lives and the precious people in them
   that we learn how to love. And it is in learning to love well that we
   become fully human, that we evolve into our own best selves.

   “The privilege of a lifetime,” as Joseph Campbell famously said, “is
   being who you are.” My guess is, it takes most of us a lifetime to
   fully rise to the challenge. Certainly I’m a work in progress myself —
   still seeking, still practicing, still astonished by all I don’t know.
   The journey home is ongoing, a universal pilgrimage — as I discovered
   while writing my most recent memoir, Magical Journey, which brought me
   face to face with the most demanding soul work of all: letting go of
   the need to improve ourselves and relaxing, instead, into the wonder of
   who we already are.

   _K at view 3 _K at view 3

   Below: a few of the words that remind me that faith is neither a
   possession nor an achievement, that in fact it’s really just a
   willingness to keep showing up — at the kitchen sink, on a yoga mat,
   for a loved one, at a friend’s side, in a church pew or in the garden
   or at the dinner table. It’s not something to do, but a way to be:
   working in harmony with things as they are. Click on the phrases below
   to read related posts, pieces I think of as bulletins from the road.
   (My complete archive of Soul Work posts is here.)


   Slow down.

   Pay attention.

   Be present.

   Allow.

   Let go.

   Connect.

   Trust.

   Surrender.

   Practice gratitude.

   Give.

   Choose love.

   Pray.


   yoga mat yoga mat



   Last year on my 67th birthday, just a week after f Last year on my 67th
   birthday, just a week after finishing breast cancer treatment, I told
   my kids I wanted to take a trip with each one of them before I turn 70.
   My friend Randy reminds me that we must think now in terms of QTR —
   quality time remaining — and so I do. Ten days in Italy with @hlewers89
   have reminded me just how vast and precious the world is, how travel
   can bring us home to ourselves, and how important it is to step out of
   our daily routines and into challenges and adventures while we’re
   strong and healthy enough to enjoy them, and also just how fun it is to
   spend time with my 36-year-old son. When we arrived in Milan we
   discovered our luggage had been lost in a massive breakdown at Heathrow
   that could take days to untangle. And so we spent our first day buying
   new everything— from underwear to dental floss to walking shoes. By
   dinner time we had our Italian capsule wardrobes and tiny duffel bags
   to pack them in. There was something kind of liberating about starting
   from scratch and assembling what we needed for a week of walking in the
   Lakes district. And I come home not only with new clothes but with some
   new intentions, too: take the trip, travel light, climb the mountain,
   drink the good wine, make new friends (what joy!), eat the gelato (and
   the cheese), make memories with the people you love, ask for help,
   embrace cultures and people and places that stretch you, learn a few
   words in the language you don’t know and speak them with all your
   heart. Life is short. Last year on my 67th birthday, just a week after
   finishing breast cancer treatment, I told my kids I wanted to take a
   trip with each one of them before I turn 70. My friend Randy reminds me
   that we must think now in terms of QTR — quality time remaining — and
   so I do. Ten days in Italy with @hlewers89 have reminded me just how
   vast and precious the world is, how travel can bring us home to
   ourselves, and how important it is to step out of our daily routines
   and into challenges and adventures while we’re strong and healthy
   enough to enjoy them, and also just how fun it is to spend time with my
   36-year-old son. When we arrived in Milan we discovered our luggage had
   been lost in a massive breakdown at Heathrow that could take days to
   untangle. And so we spent our first day buying new everything— from
   underwear to dental floss to walking shoes. By dinner time we had our
   Italian capsule wardrobes and tiny duffel bags to pack them in. There
   was something kind of liberating about starting from scratch and
   assembling what we needed for a week of walking in the Lakes district.
   And I come home not only with new clothes but with some new intentions,
   too: take the trip, travel light, climb the mountain, drink the good
   wine, make new friends (what joy!), eat the gelato (and the cheese),
   make memories with the people you love, ask for help, embrace cultures
   and people and places that stretch you, learn a few words in the
   language you don’t know and speak them with all your heart. Life is
   short.
   "Easter is the soul's first taste of spring." — Ri "Easter is the
   soul's first taste of spring." — Richelle E. Goodrich "Easter is the
   soul's first taste of spring." — Richelle E. Goodrich
   The Way to Start a Day The way to start a day is t The Way to Start a
   Day The way to start a day is this: Go outside and face the east and
   greet the sun with some kind of blessing or chant or song that you made
   yourself and keep for early morning. The way to make the song is this:
   Don't try to think what words to use until you're standing there alone.
   When you feel the sun you'll feel the song, too. Just sing it... A
   morning needs to be sung to. A new day needs to be honored... Your song
   will be an offering and you'll be one more person in one more place at
   one more time in the world saying hello to the sun, letting it know you
   are there. If the sky turns a color sky never was before just watch it.
   That's part of the magic. That's the way to start a day. ~ Byrd Baylo
   The Way to Start a Day The way to start a day is this: Go outside and
   face the east and greet the sun with some kind of blessing or chant or
   song that you made yourself and keep for early morning. The way to make
   the song is this: Don't try to think what words to use until you're
   standing there alone. When you feel the sun you'll feel the song, too.
   Just sing it... A morning needs to be sung to. A new day needs to be
   honored... Your song will be an offering and you'll be one more person
   in one more place at one more time in the world saying hello to the
   sun, letting it know you are there. If the sky turns a color sky never
   was before just watch it. That's part of the magic. That's the way to
   start a day. ~ Byrd Baylo
   As I begin to think of myself as a cancer survivor As I begin to think
   of myself as a cancer survivor, with all the gratitude and uncertainty
   that phrase contains, turning 67 feels like a milestone, a time to
   reflect on what it all means. I spent my birthday writing -- a gift to
   myself, and to you, too. A new blog post is up on my site, please come
   visit. (Also, I'm giving away a book I love!)
   https://www.katrinakenison.com/2025/10/04/you-cant-have-it-all/ As I
   begin to think of myself as a cancer survivor, with all the gratitude
   and uncertainty that phrase contains, turning 67 feels like a
   milestone, a time to reflect on what it all means. I spent my birthday
   writing -- a gift to myself, and to you, too. A new blog post is up on
   my site, please come visit. (Also, I'm giving away a book I love!)
   https://www.katrinakenison.com/2025/10/04/you-cant-have-it-all/
   “The crickets sang in the grasses. They sang the s “The crickets sang
   in the grasses. They sang the song of summer’s ending, a sad monotonous
   song. “Summer is over and gone, over and gone, over and gone. Summer is
   dying, dying.” “ ~ E. B. White, “Charlotte’s Web.” It is surely the
   most poignant soundtrack of our year, and these nights I step outside
   before bed to listen with my whole body. Sad, yes, but never
   monotonous. #crickets #autumn “The crickets sang in the grasses. They
   sang the song of summer’s ending, a sad monotonous song. “Summer is
   over and gone, over and gone, over and gone. Summer is dying, dying.” “
   ~ E. B. White, “Charlotte’s Web.” It is surely the most poignant
   soundtrack of our year, and these nights I step outside before bed to
   listen with my whole body. Sad, yes, but never monotonous. #crickets
   #autumn
   “It is this way with wonder: it takes a bit of pat “It is this way with
   wonder: it takes a bit of patience, and it takes putting yourself in
   the right place at the right time. It requires that we be curious
   enough to forgo our small distractions in order to find the world.” ~
   Aimee Nezhukumatathil. Stepping outside at dusk tonight, we found
   ourselves in the right place. #maine #baileyisland #wonder #sunset
   #summer “It is this way with wonder: it takes a bit of patience, and it
   takes putting yourself in the right place at the right time. It
   requires that we be curious enough to forgo our small distractions in
   order to find the world.” ~ Aimee Nezhukumatathil. Stepping outside at
   dusk tonight, we found ourselves in the right place. #maine
   #baileyisland #wonder #sunset #summer

Follow me on Instagram

@ katrina kenison

   Copyright © 2026 Katrina Kenison
