   #Human character - the I and threefold soul Free Man Creator (en) Free
   Man Creator Atom feed

   (BUTTON)

   Home
   About
   About this site
   How to use this site
   Contact
   Contents FMC
   0. Overview Free Man Creator
   1. Man - the human being
   2. Evolution
   3. Spiritual Hierarchies
   4. Worldview Spiritual Science
   5. Initiation
   6. The Michaelic Stream
   Christ and MoG
   Overview
   1. Introduction
   2. Base study modules (1-7)
   3. Study essays (N/A)
   4. Advanced modules (8-14)
   5. Human Christ experience (15-21)
   6. Classic chronological (N/A)
   Reincarnation
   Overview - Man's cycle of reincarnation
   1. Introduction
   2. The journey
   3. Metamorphosis (N/A)
   4. Karma or destiny
   5. Spectrum of death
   6. The world of the dead
   7. Other aspects (N/A)
   Golden Chain
   Introduction
   Overview
   Schematics (N/A)
   Cosmic breathing
   tmp scratchpad
   Tools and Schemas
   Tools and practical info
   About the FMC schemas
   FMC schemas downloads
   FMC schema listing
   Interactive
   Overview Q&A interaction forum
   React with Structured Discussions
   React via contact form
   ------------
   Q&A topics (central coord.)
   Discussion topics (central coord.)
   Site development blog (not maintained)
   Donate
   Donate
   Why your support matters
   Discussion
   Create account
   Log in

   Free Man Creator
   ____________________
   (Go)

Human character - the I and threefold soul

   From Free Man Creator
   Jump to:navigation, search
     * In every-day language we use the term 'human character', or a Man's
       character, to denote the sum of characteristics that describe a
       person in his behaviour and the way he reacts to the countless
       situations of everyday existence. These reactions differ according
       to the person, and we interpret this by saying that the characters
       of these individuals are different. Human character includes that
       person's physical characteristics, psychological attributes, and
       particular aspects of behaviour, as shown through a Man's actions.
       These characteristic sets of behaviors, cognitions, and emotional
       and mental patterns is related to Man's Personality and the complex
       nature of his constitution.
     * In human sciences, psychology attempts to describe and explain the
       tendencies that underlie differences in behavior, personality and
       human character. Psychologists have taken various approaches
       including biological, cognitive, learning, trait-based theories,
       and psychodynamic or humanistic approaches.
     * In the arts, a character or character sketch renders a thumbnail
       portrayal of an individual with descriptions, and particularly
       attempts to capture behavioural patterns, expressions or gestures
       that get to the essence of the individual. .

   In spiritual science:

   The development of the I shows how Man received the fourth bodily
   principle of the human 'I' through the sacrifice of the Spirits of Form
   (SoF) that let their substance ripple in and take hold of Man's astral,
   etheric and physical bodies. These faculties are called respectively
   the sentient, intellectual and consciousness soul, together making up
   the threefold soul. Man's individual spiritual I uses these lower
   bodies, and - as part of the development of humanity across the ages -
   grows into using the available faculties: starting with the sentient
   soul .. upto the consciousness soul. This aspect depends on:
     * the maturity of the soul, as related to when the individual started
       incarnating, see Planets hosting beings at various stages of
       evolution
     * the soul's individual pathway of developing through incarnate
       experiences, and how successful it has been in accomplishing the
       target for each age, or partially or fully falling sideways in
       error, see Sixteen paths of perdition

   .

   The natural development of the I is one of growth from the sentient
   soul experience growing into intellectual and later consciousness soul.
   Thereby the human 'I' uses an always larger part of Man's lower
   structure as a means to function and express. This is represented on
   Schema FMC00.431 by the arrows to the right. The consciousness soul is
   pivotal as it brings fructification from the spiritual world and moral
   impulses that are brought down also to the intellectual and sentient
   souls. As a result, Man's human character is undergoes transformation
   as the I matures in the mastery and use of the threefold soul.

   It is important to realize Man does not leave behind the one aspect for
   the other, but gains in spiritual maturity: the mastery of having grown
   into the intellectual soul changes the sentient soul, and similarly the
   consciousness soul fructifies and changes the intellectual and sentient
   souls.

   Hence, the human 'I' is really alive in the three lower bodily
   principles or members of Man all the time, and these three aspects are
   called the threefold soul. How the I holds the middle (or can be seen
   in the workings) of the threefold soul is also described in the
   lectures referenced on Schema FMC00.428A (below). Note the
   consciousness soul, intellectual soul and sentient soul should not be
   completely equated with willing, thinking and feeling, for the latter
   are to be found in each of the three soul members
   [ ]

Contents

     * 1 Lexicon terms
     * 2 Aspects
          + 2.1 the threefold soul
               o 2.1.1 consciousness soul
          + 2.2 human character
          + 2.3 soul life
          + 2.4 various
     * 3 Inspirational quote
     * 4 Illustrations
     * 5 Lecture coverage and references
          + 5.1 Overview coverage
          + 5.2 Reference extracts
               o 5.2.1 1904-GA009 Ch. 1.4
               o 5.2.2 1905-09-02-GA091
               o 5.2.3 1907-03-16-GA097
               o 5.2.4 1907-12-27-GA101
               o 5.2.5 1908-10-19-GA107
               o 5.2.6 1908-10-26-GA244 Q&A 172.1
               o 5.2.7 1909-10-21-GA068B
               o 5.2.8 1909-10-22-GA058
               o 5.2.9 1909-10-28-GA058
               o 5.2.10 1909-10-29-GA068B
               o 5.2.11 1909-12-05-GA058
               o 5.2.12 1910-03-12-GA068B
               o 5.2.13 1910-03-14-GA058
               o 5.2.14 1910-06-09-GA121
               o 5.2.15 1910-06-16-GA121
               o 5.2.16 1914-01-24-GA266/3
               o 5.2.17 1915-03-07-GA159
               o 5.2.18 1917-10-08-GA177
          + 5.3 Laocoön and Niobe groups
          + 5.4 consciousness soul
               o 5.4.1 1916-10-10-GA168
               o 5.4.2 1918-12-28-GA187
               o 5.4.3 1923-01-30-GA257
     * 6 Discussion
          + 6.1 Note 1 - Terminology: 'Andacht'
               o 6.1.1 Note from a reader (computer translation from DE)
                 2024-03
          + 6.2 Note 2 - On the consciousness soul
               o 6.2.1 1 - Introduction
               o 6.2.2 2 - Study approach with the FMC Schemas
               o 6.2.3 Six viewpoints
                    # 6.2.3.1 1 - Schema FMC00.431
                    # 6.2.3.2 2 - Schema FMC00.428A
                    # 6.2.3.3 3 - Schema FMC00.391
                    # 6.2.3.4 4 - Schema FMC00.134
                    # 6.2.3.5 5 - Schema FMC00.472A
                    # 6.2.3.6 6 - Schema FMC00.046 and Schema FMC00.569
                      with Schema FMC00.168
                    # 6.2.3.7 Importance
                         @ 6.2.3.7.1 7 - Schema FMC00.468 and Schema
                           FMC00.438
                    # 6.2.3.8 Extra notes
               o 6.2.4 3 - The pivotal importance of the consciousness
                 soul
                    # 6.2.4.1 More
                    # 6.2.4.2 Addition
                         @ 6.2.4.2.1 Perspective 1
                         @ 6.2.4.2.2 Perspective 2
                         @ 6.2.4.2.3 Integration
                         @ 6.2.4.2.4 Perspective 3
                         @ 6.2.4.2.5 Postscriptum
     * 7 Related pages
     * 8 References and further reading
          + 8.1 Various other

Lexicon terms

     * human character
     * sentient soul
     * intellectual soul
     * threefold soul
     * consciousness soul
     * Laocoön group (or Laokoon or Laocoon)
     * Niobe group (or Florentine Niobids)
     * Andacht

Aspects

the threefold soul

     * the Human ‘I’ encloses within itself the sentient, the intellectual
       and consciousness souls (1910-06-09-GA121, see also Schema
       FMC00.428A)
     * consist of three modifications, three parts within the astral body
       .. these three members of the astral body prepare the
       transformation of the astral body itself, of the etheric body and
       of the physical body. But these transformations are still not what
       meets us as the actual human inner being or soul. The soul, the
       inner part of Man, the three modifications of the astral body must
       make use of certain instruments, and these express themselves in
       such a way, that in the astral body the sentient soul is a sort of
       instrument, in the etheric body the intellectual soul soul, and in
       the physical body the consciousness soul (1910-06-09-GA121)
     * the threefold soul and the Mars, Mercury and Jupiter influences
          + Mars <-> sentient soul (<-> sound ether); Mercury <->
            intellectual soul (<-> light ether); Jupiter <-> consciousness
            soul (<-> electrical forces) (1905-09-02-GA091 and Note Nr.
            6821 published in GA091 p 330)
          + see also 1908-02-15-GA102 and 1906-01-07-GA262 on Earth's
            seven epochs#Mars and Mercury influences 3)
     * the archangel does not 'see' the human sentient soul or the part of
       the intellectual soul concerned with external sensory perception,
       only the part of the intellectual soul and consciousness soul with
       purely sense-free thinking, art, moral ideals etc.
       (1910-06-09-GA121, see also Third Hierarchy)
     * threefold soul and Christ impulse
          + for further explanation on Schemas FMC00.428 and FMC00.428A,
            see Thinking Feeling Willing#1917-10-08-GA177 and Schema
            FMC00.488 on that same topic page.

consciousness soul

     * “The consciousness soul is that part of the soul through which the
       soul comes to a consciousness of the spiritual world." (1904-GA009,
       Ch 2)
          + the best way to get into an imagination is the row below on
            Schema FMC00.431 that depicts the influx of the spiritual from
            the right to the left, illustrating how moral ideals come from
            from the spiritual world through the consciousness soul and
            influence 'down' the intellectual and sentient soul and work
            in the lower bodies of Man.
          + As a metaphoric image, imagine osmosis or the movement of a
            less concentrated solvent through a semipermeable membrane to
            another more concentrated solvent. In this case the membranes
            are the structures of Man's bodily principles that are
            permeated by the spiritual. The spiritual 'ripples through'
            from above downwards into the human bodily principles - a
            continuation of what is depicted above left on Schema
            FMC00.046 on Development of the I. Or also: "This constant
            pressing through of super-sensible experience into earthly
            experience is one of the great secrets of existence"
            (1923-01-30-GA257). It is important to realize that this
            'flow' is there, also in context of the Christ Impulse and the
            so-called Second Coming (see Christ in the etheric) which is
            similarly the rippling and pushing through of the higher
            Christos, buddhi or spirit-self cosmic principle (re Schema
            FMC00.481)
          + this is also why Rudolf Steiner expands on the term 'moral
            imagination'; see Moral ideals#moral imagination
     * "in the consciousness-soul, the actual I-soul, is integrated the
       spirit-self or manas .. the spirit self (or manas) is enclosed in
       the consciousness soul" (1907-12-27-GA101)
     * as key to becoming a spiritual being
          + as the consciousness soul is the principle in which the
            spirit-self develops, this principle is called the 'mother of
            Christ', or also the 'Virgin Sophia'. The spirit-self is born
            from within ... out of the consciousness soul. Hence the
            principle giving birth to Man's higher triad or the 'mother'
            of such spiritualized human being is not a physical bodily
            mother, but she lies within him and is the purified and
            spiritualized consciousness soul. (1907-11-20-GA100; see also
            Mary#1907-11-20-GA100)
          + The consciousness soul gives birth to the true spiritual human
            'I', from the astral world to the spirit world. See also left
            and right on Schema FMC00.508 regarding the Interpenetration
            of astral and spirit worlds, and more specifically see the
            connection between layers 6 and 7 of the higher astral world
            on Schema FMC00.261, connecting to layer 3 of the lower spirit
            world Schema FMC00.136
     * “Only in the age of the consciousness soul, does the possibility
       arise for evil to be taken up in the human soul itself."
       (1918-10-27-GA185)
     * The development of the consciousness soul demands liberty of
       thought; and this can flourish only in a certain atmosphere. In the
       future this will become increasingly challenging due to pressures
       of dogmatic authority striving for power. (1916-10-10-GA168, see
       869#1916-10-10-GA168)
     * interactions with others
          + The consciousness soul can only develop when our contacts with
            other people are made from within ... when less importance is
            attached to what takes place at present between one person and
            another than to what works inwardly in solitude as the result
            of former incarnations ... when still unconscious, instinctive
            reminiscences and after-effects of former incarnations strike
            upwards (1916-10-10-GA168).
          + Man senses his true I when they come in contact with other
            people ... Man known only a reflection of his true I, but his
            true I shines into him when he comes in contact with other
            people. Another karmically connected human being gives him
            something real (1918-12-28-GA187)
          + in other words: here is spoken to discern differently in human
            interactions ... as in physical contacts there is a spiritual
            hollowness .. the true connection is spiritual, that we try or
            start to feel that we are a spirit interaction with another
            spirit, so as an Individuality and no longer as a Personality.

human character

     * The etheric body is the bearer of a man's habits and the bearer of
       memory and the temperament, of the permanent qualities of soul in a
       human being (1906-10-15-GA096; see Karma or
       destiny#1906-10-15-GA096)
     * physiognomy as the physical expression of human character
       (1910-03-12-GA068B and 1910-03-14-GA058)
     * link between soul disposition or state of the soul (gemüt) and
       temperament (1908-10-26-GA244 Q&A 172.1 and 1911-11-09-GA244 Q&A
       218.3), see also Human temperaments
     * Laocoön group (or also Laokoon or Laocoon) (1910-03-14-GA058,
       1917-01-24-GA292) - and Lessing's views
          + symbol of human character, or the unbalance between the three
            elements of the soul
               o Laocoon shows, in an outward physical way, the definite
                 moment when the human being loses the unified character
                 of the I which as a strong center joins the body members
                 together. Through the entwining of the serpents, that
                 which we call the human I is out of the body of Laocoon,
                 and the individual impulses of the I, each one stripped
                 bare into the physical, go their way Each individual limb
                 goes its own way in limb and head and is not brought into
                 characterful harmony with the outer form,because the I
                 has just disappeared. (GA058)
          + the Laocoon group is a monument to the overcoming of the old
            priestly culture (of the third cultural age) by the cleverness
            of the individual human being (in the fourth and fifth
            cultural ages), built on the wisdom of the individual human
            being. The priest Laocoon, entwined with snakes (as a symbol
            of wisdom) shows how the world's culture of wisdom overcomes
            the old culture of priests, in which people had different
            views of truth and wisdom and of what should happen. Note:
            this is also contained symbolically in the legend of the
            Trojan horse, showing how the Trojan priestly culture was
            overthrown by the wisdom of Odysseus who built the Trojan
            horse (GA093)
          + relation with the Niobe group or Florentine Niobids (group of
            statues discovered in 1583 in Rome, now in museum in Florence,
            Italy)
               o Niobe is described as opposite of Laocoon. When the
                 physical and etheric bodies are destroyed from the
                 outside (and become more rigid in matter, rather than
                 being formed by the I and astral body from above), they
                 take on a form which, on the one hand, follows the
                 destructive power and, on the other hand, makes it
                 visible how the I and the astral body are forced out.
                 Physical and etheric bodies freeze in formed matter.. and
                 this is reproduced in Laocoon in the formation of the
                 mouth, in the formation of the face, in the holding of
                 the arms, in the forms which the fingers assume
                 (1922-03-31-GA211)

soul life

     * desire and judgement - two main elements in soul life, and what
       takes place in the process of human sense perception and the
       creation of mental images, sensations and memory (see Schema
       FMC00.565 and 1910-11-01-GA115, 1910-11-03-GA115)
     * see more on: Aspects of human behaviour

various

     * "the threefold character [of the soul] and its connection with the
       cosmos cannot be expressed more significantly than it has been
       expressed in 'Kalevala' "(1914-11-09-GA158)
     * about Schema FMC00.428: see 1908-08-10-GA105 that describes what
       the situation would have looked like without Luciferic infection:
       Man would have received the Christ principle but without freedom
     * unbalances, see Man: an integrated view#Unbalances in the human
       bodily constitution and between Man's bodily principles
     * lesser and greater guardian of the threshold, see also
       Apparitions#Guardian of the threshold

Inspirational quote

   1909-10-29-GA068B

     The I 'plays on the instrument of the soul and the different strings
     of human soul life',  what comes out as music and the expression of
     individual soul life, is what we know as and call human character

   1918-10-19-GA185 see: Reconquista#1918-10-19-GA185 and Current fifth
   cultural age#Inspirational quotes

     The age of the consciousness soul demands that Man should stand on
     his own feet, be self-sufficient and, as personality, emancipate
     himself. He must abandon the old supports. He can no longer allow
     himself to be persuaded into what he should believe; he must work
     out for himself his own religious faith.

Illustrations

   Schema FMC00.431: provides and overview on how the human 'I' "plays on
   the instrument of the soul and the different strings of human soul
   life", what comes out as music and the expression of individual soul
   life, is what we know as and call human character.
     * how the I pulses through, works on, and develops the human soul
     * the human I works itself 'up' sentient -> intellectual ->
       consciousness soul, and can express itself in each of the three
       areas of soul life
     * the I works order & harmony in the soul life, so a mutual
       fructification of sentient, intellectual, consciousness soul
       components

   .

   Note: this schema was assembled as a foundation mainly on the basis of
   the original German lecture versions of 1909-10-29-GA068B and
   1910-03-12-GA068B, it can most probably be enriched by including
   contents from the other five lectures listed.

   Important for the understanding of the consciousness soul is the last
   row, and the influx of the spiritual from the right to the left,
   illustrating how moral ideals come from from the spiritual world
   through the consciousness soul and influence 'down' the intellectual
   and sentient soul and work in the lower bodies of Man.

   As a metaphoric image, imagine osmosis or the movement of a less
   concentrated solvent through a semipermeable membrane to another more
   concentrated solvent. In this case the membranes are the structures of
   Man's bodily principles that are permeated by the spiritual. The
   spiritual 'ripples through' from above downwards into the human bodily
   principles - a continuation of what is depicted above left on Schema
   FMC00.046 on Development of the I. Or also: "This constant pressing
   through of super-sensible experience into earthly experience is one of
   the great secrets of existence" (1923-01-30-GA257). It is important to
   realize that this 'flow' is there, also in context of the Christ
   Impulse and the so-called Second Coming (see Christ in the etheric)
   which is similarly the rippling and pushing through of the higher
   Christos, budhi or life-spirit cosmic principle (re Schema FMC00.481)

   With the development of the consciousness soul, and leading into the
   next sixth cultural age of the spirit-self, comes the the gradual
   development of community and selfless love .. "a few thousand years
   from now, there will be unpleasant soul-conditions aroused when a Man
   wishes as an individual to have any sort of happiness in the world
   without its being shared by others. This interdependence of mankind is
   inherent in human evolution ... This is simply the direction in which
   the human soul is developing." (1918-12-28-GA187)
   provides and overview on how the human 'I' "plays on the instrument of
   the soul and the different strings of human soul life", what comes out
   as music and the expression of individual soul life, is what we know as
   and call human character. * how the I pulses through, works on, and
   develops the human soul * the human I works itself 'up' sentient ->
   intellectual ->  consciousness soul, and can express itself in each of
   the three areas of soul life * the I works order & harmony in the soul
   life, so a mutual fructification of sentient, intellectual,
   consciousness soul components . Note: this schema was assembled as a
   foundation mainly on the basis of the original German lecture versions
   of 1909-10-29-GA068B and 1910-03-12-GA068B, it can most probably be
   enriched by including contents from the other five lectures listed.
   Important for the understanding of the consciousness soul is the last
   row, and the influx of the spiritual from the right to the left,
   illustrating how moral ideals come from from the spiritual world
   through the consciousness soul and influence 'down' the intellectual
   and sentient soul and work in the lower bodies of Man. As a metaphoric
   image, imagine osmosis or the movement of a less concentrated solvent
   through a semipermeable membrane to another more concentrated solvent.
   In this case the membranes are the structures of Man's bodily
   principles that are permeated by the spiritual. The spiritual 'ripples
   through' from above downwards into the human bodily principles - a
   continuation of what is depicted above left on Schema FMC00.046 on
   Development of the I. Or also: "This constant pressing through of
   super-sensible experience into earthly experience is one of the great
   secrets of existence" (1923-01-30-GA257). It is important to realize
   that this 'flow' is there, also in context of the Christ Impulse and
   the so-called Second Coming (see Christ in the etheric) which is
   similarly the rippling and pushing through of the higher Christos,
   budhi or life-spirit cosmic principle (re Schema FMC00.481) With the
   development of the consciousness soul, and leading into the next sixth
   cultural age of the spirit-self, comes the the gradual development of
   community and selfless love .. "a few thousand years from now, there
   will be unpleasant soul-conditions aroused when a Man wishes as an
   individual to have any sort of happiness in the world without its being
   shared by others. This interdependence of mankind is inherent in human
   evolution ... This is simply the direction in which the human soul is
   developing." (1918-12-28-GA187)

   Schema FMC00.428A adds the explanation from Rudolf Steiner's narrative
   in the sources listed, against the background of Schema FMC00.428.

   It shows how "the Christ Impulse triggered a reversal of the influences
   of the two crossing streams", and gave Man independence in love and
   allowed for a spiritualization of love, as love without true freedom is
   not love.

   Note: all texts originate from the GA244 sources listed, but were
   aggregated into a single schema explanation.
   [1100px-FMC00.428A.jpg]

   Schema FMC00.565: shows a simple schematic to the description the two
   main elements in soul life, and what takes place in the process of
   human sense perception and the creation of mental images, sensations
   and memory - as related to desire and judgement.
   shows a simple schematic to the description the two main elements in
   soul life, and what takes place in the process of human sense
   perception and the creation of mental images, sensations and memory -
   as related to desire and judgement.

   Schema FMC00.428 illustrates the I as the center or cardinal point of
   two opposing streams of Jehovah (Spirits of Form) and Lucifer. The
   Jehovah SoF impulse infused love into Man's physical blood from below,
   the Luciferic influence brought Man's freedom and egoism from above,
   into Man's astral body and developing sentient soul. Both influences
   were first subconscious, and develop to full consciousness only with
   the maturing of Man's threefold soul. The Christ Impulse brought about
   a shift, see Schema FMC00.428A.
   [1100px-FMC00.428.jpg]

   Schema FMC00.468: provides the key statement and illustration of the
   fructification of Man by the Christ Impulse (from 1910-09-11-GA123)

   Specifically, how the evolved consciousness soul is the gateway for
   this spiritual fructification by Man's higher triad (consisting of
   spirit-self or manas, life-spirit or budhi, and spirit-man or atma)
   through the Christ Impulse as the budhi life-giving influence driving
   this: "The Christ impulse is the penetration of budhi"
   (1906-11-03-GA094) - see also Schema FMC00.481.

   And from 1923-05-07-GA224: "The heart of Man as it opens may be
   symbolized by the flower opening itself to the sun; and what pours down
   from the sun, giving the flower the fertilizing power it needs .. [the
   Christ Impulse into one's I and astral body] may be symbolized by the
   tongues of fire descending upon the heads of the disciples."

   See also variant Schema FMC00.468A for a better visual.

   Note: In the ancient mysteries the plant was used as a metaphor for the
   receiving 'cup' of the Holy Grail, see Christ Module 6 - Principle in
   image and story#Schema FMC00.270 and variants - the plant as metaphor.
   The 'technicality' of this is illustrated with Schema FMC00.354.
   provides the key statement and illustration of the fructification of
   Man by the Christ Impulse (from 1910-09-11-GA123) Specifically, how the
   evolved consciousness soul is the gateway for this spiritual
   fructification by Man's higher triad (consisting of spirit-self or
   manas, life-spirit or budhi, and spirit-man or atma) through the Christ
   Impulse as the budhi life-giving influence driving this: "The Christ
   impulse is the penetration of budhi" (1906-11-03-GA094) - see also
   Schema FMC00.481. And from 1923-05-07-GA224: "The heart of Man as it
   opens may be symbolized by the flower opening itself to the sun; and
   what pours down from the sun, giving the flower the fertilizing power
   it needs .. [the Christ Impulse into one's I and astral body] may be
   symbolized by the tongues of fire descending upon the heads of the
   disciples." See also variant Schema FMC00.468A for a better visual.
   Note: In the ancient mysteries the plant was used as a metaphor for the
   receiving 'cup' of the Holy Grail, see Christ Module 6 - Principle in
   image and story#Schema FMC00.270 and variants - the plant as metaphor.
   The 'technicality' of this is illustrated with Schema FMC00.354.

   Schema FMC00.677: provides a synthetic overview of the planetary
   influences on the development of the human threefold soul, and
   specifically the Mars and Mercury influences of iron and mercury of in
   the Lemurian and Atlantean epochs.

   See also Schema FMC00.219 and Schema FMC00.451, and the foundational
   topic pages Human 'I' and Development of the I
   provides a synthetic overview of the planetary influences on the
   development of the human threefold soul, and specifically the Mars and
   Mercury influences of iron and mercury of in the Lemurian and Atlantean
   epochs. See also Schema FMC00.219 and Schema FMC00.451, and the
   foundational topic pages Human 'I' and Development of the I

   Schema FMC00.085 is a simple summary table capturing key figures
   appearing in the Kalevela, the story of the development of the sentient
   soul. (first draft, to be extended)
   [900px-FMC00.085.jpg]

Lecture coverage and references

Overview coverage

   Below are seven main lectures part of 1909-GA058 and GA068B.
     * GA058 volume was first published in 1984, with the title:
       Metamorphoses of the soul, paths of soul experience. Interestingly,
       the lectures in that volume first have 1909-12-05-GA058 (anger: the
       chained Prometheus), then 1909-10-22-GA058 (truth, and Goethe's
       Pandora), 1909-10-28-GA058 (Andacht), and then 1910-03-14-GA058
       (human character).
     * The chronological ranking of lectures now shows that although four
       lectures constitute the headlines of this volume's title, Rudolf
       Steiner actually covered this quite differently. GA068B was
       published in first edition in 2021, nearly 40 years later and over
       a century after the lectures were held.

   This is another illustration that shows how the constitution of the
   original GA included the guiding principle to not include the
   publishing of what were regarded 'double' lectures with similar
   contents or coverage than other lectures. Indeed Rudolf Steiner
   sometimes held lectures that were quite similar or congruent in
   contents. These alternative or complementary lectures were only
   published as part of the GA2025, most typical examples of which are
   GA111 and GA117A. For the earnest student, these lectures sometimes
   contain important details, another phrasing or other differences.

   The above example also shows that no 'contents based coherence' or
   'study logic' was used for the assembly of the volumes, as lectures
   could have been presented differently, as the logic of Schema FMC00.431
   shows.

   Note that in 1910-GA059, Vol 2 of Metamorphoses of the soul, Rudolf
   Steiner goes into characteristics such as conscience, laughing and
   crying, human error, praying, positive and negative soul disposition,
   and so on.

Reference extracts

1904-GA009 Ch. 1.4

   also on: Moral ideals#1904-GA009 Ch. 1.4

     Moral goodness is independent of inclinations and passions, inasmuch
     as it does not allow itself to be commanded by, but commands them.
     Likes and dislikes, desire and loathing belong to the personal soul
     of man. Duty stands higher than likes and dislikes. Duty may stand
     so high in the eyes of a Man that he will sacrifice his life for its
     sake. And a Man stands the higher the more he has ennobled his
     inclinations, his likes and dislikes, so that without compulsion or
     subjection they themselves obey what is recognised as duty.

     Moral goodness has, like truth, its eternal value in itself, and
     does not receive it from the sentient soul. By causing the
     self-existent true and good to come to life in his inner being, Man
     raises himself above the mere sentient soul. The eternal spirit
     shines into it. A light is kindled in it which is imperishable. In
     so far as the soul lives in this light, it is a participant of the
     eternal. It unites therewith its own existence. What the soul
     carries within itself of the true and the good is immortal in it.

     Let us call that which shines forth in the soul as eternal the
     consciousness-soul.

   and

     The consciousness-soul is in touch with the self-existent truth
     which is independent of all antipathy and sympathy; the spirit-self
     bears within it the same truth, but taken up into and enclosed by
     the I, individualized by the latter and absorbed into the
     independent being of Man.

1905-09-02-GA091

   Mars, Mercury and Jupiter's Effect on the Formation of the Human Ego

   see also Note Nr. 6821 published in GA091 p 330

     The various limbs of the human being are related to the seven
     successive planetary stages of evolution. We must be clear that the
     human body as such has the physical degrees, then the etheric body
     and the astral body. Developed they have on Old Saturn, Old Sun, Old
     Moon.
     * Let us realize for once that something also had to have been
       already present when the Old Saturn stage began. We must ask
       ourselves: How did the physical body originate? This has become
       from an astral body. It is divided into these three parts, as it
       were like pieces of ice are condensed in water. We can regard this
       physical body as a condensation. It was exactly an imprint of the
       preceding divine astral body. During the whole development of Old
       Saturn this physical body gradually subdivides. Little by little
       the seven sensory germs of man work themselves out.
     * On Old sun the etheric body separates. This division causes at the
       same time that the senses, which were formed earlier on Old Saturn,
       attain a certain ability. Earlier they were only physical
       apparatuses on Old Saturn. Because of the addition of the ether on
       Old Sun, the eye shines, the ear sounds. So that we can say that
       the physical body and the etheric body work together on Old Sun,
       while a rest of the astral body remains.
     * On Old Moon, a new system is added: masculine and feminine, in such
       a way that on the moon the physical body is always the masculine,
       the etheric body the feminine. The astral body is neutral.

     Now we have on Old Moon three bodies sharply differentiated:
     physical body, etheric body and astral body, which come to Earth as
     the fruit of Old Moon. What must happen? Man must become self-aware,
     he must get an "I". He could not get an "I" if only the forces were
     in him which come from Old Moon; it must come from outside.

     It is the force that comes from Jupiter. From the next planet we
     will enter comes the force that forms our I. The power center of
     Jupiter is already there, the Earth Jupiter stage not yet. The
     beings that have now reached Jupiter draw Man after them and now
     give him the power of the I.

     [re link with SoF, see Development of the I]

     The astral body must now first be made suitable to become the bearer
     of this I, and is now endowed with two kinds of forces: with Mars
     forces and with Mercury forces.
     * The Mars forces first make it free from the Old Moon forces, and
     * the Mercury forces prepare it for the next three planets; they make
       it suitable for ascension.

     [and]
     * What becomes of the astral body when it has absorbed the Martian
       forces, we call the sentient soul;
     * when it has absorbed the Mercury forces: the intellectual soul,
     * and the move to Jupiter: consciousness soul.

     Now a great change has taken place with the astral body. This
     revolution causes its whole nature to change, it is split into two.
     * In the astral body of the present Earth Man the lunar forces are
       still present: This is the lower pole of the astral body;
     * and that striving towards Jupiter is the higher pole - they are the
       bodily and the spiritual pole.

     * the Mercury forces prepare it for the next three planets; they make
       it suitable for ascension.

     [and]
     * What goes on with the bodily pole is subject to birth and death.
     * The spiritual pole is still a baby, gradually forming and becoming
       the causal body.

     What the latter has achieved remains, while the lower pole is always
     building up its physical and etheric body anew. This lower pole of
     the astral body is even now hermaphroditic, male-female. And while
     on Old Moon the physical body was always male, the etheric body
     always female, on Earth this changes in such a way that the human
     being is male in one incarnation and female in the other. Likewise,
     the etheric body alternates. When the physical body is passive, the
     etheric body is active. The forces are polar.

     Now with the etheric body, namely when it is active - masculine -
     the quality which Plato calls courage is exhibited, and we therefore
     actually find that certain acts of courage, especially when one
     speaks of love, are more exhibited in the female sex than in the
     male, while in the average man in love the receiving is more
     apparent.

     The changes in the astral body itself, brought about by Mars and
     Mercury forces and the Jupiter forces - what are they like?
     * When the divine entities recognized the time to be right, they
       brought down the Mars forces and put them into Man. These forces
       are preferably sound and sonic.
     * In contrast, the Mercury forces are preferably forces of light,
       color phenomena. The astral body becomes luminous in a new way.
       About the middle of the Atlantean race the Mercury forces begin to
       work. There also the one eye turns into the two. The Mercury forces
       illuminate the astral body ...
     * ... the Jupiter forces penetrate it with forces similar to the
       electric ones. There the foundation is laid for what has been
       described above in relation to coal.

     [so]
     * Sonic forces <-> Mars Forces <-> sentient soul
     * Light forces <-> Mercury forces <-> intellectual soul
     * Electric forces <-> Jupiter forces <-> consciousness soul

1907-03-16-GA097

   the below can be read/interpreted in the context of understanding
   dementia and diseases such as alzheimer (see Memory), but also more
   general the fact that certain soul faculties (may) weaken in old people
   (eg slower functioning etc)

   from: Questions and answers on the lecture given in Leipzig on 16 March
   1907

     Why do old people grow weak-minded, seeing that the soul remains
     changed?

     The soul does not change. It never descends from the level it has
     reached, it its instrument has grown weak. It is like a great
     pianist who cannot play well as before if the instrument is poor.

     You will say the soul no longer knows its own level. Yes, for it
     cannot see itself for as long as it is in a physical body. There you
     altogether have only the reflection of the soul, the mirror
     reflection. When the mirror grows or breaks, it can no longer give a
     reflection.

     It is only the occult student who is truly able to perceive his
     soul.

   quote - other version

     The soul, indeed, does not change. It never descends from the stage
     once reached. But its instrument has become weak, like a great
     pianist who can no longer play as he played formerly, if he has a
     bad instrument.

     You will say the soul no longer knows its own stage. Yes, the soul
     does not see itself as long as it is in a physical body. There is
     only to be found the reflection of the soul, the mirror image. Now
     the mirror becomes clouded or broken. Then it can no longer reflect.

1907-12-27-GA101

   for specific quote on consciousness soul, see: Man's bodily
   principles#1907-12-27-GA101

   for full lecture, see: Group souls of humanity#1907-12-27-GA101

1908-10-19-GA107

   on the soul-life - life in the astral world

     We live in our soul-life in the most manifold feelings, perceptions,
     ideas, concepts, and impulses of will. These all take their course
     in our soul-life from morning to evening. If we observe man
     superficially, this soul-life appears to us to be something
     self-contained, enclosed in itself, and this view is justifiable.
     Observe how your life flows along with the first thoughts formed in
     the morning, the first feelings moving through you, the first
     will-impulses arising. Observe how feeling is linked to feeling,
     will-impulse to will-impulse, until the evening when the
     consciousness sinks in sleep. That all looks like a progressing
     stream.

     Observed in a deeper sense, however, it is by no means just a
     progressing stream, for through our thoughts, feelings and
     perceptions, we stand in a continual relation — to most people quite
     unconsciously — to higher worlds. Today let us consider this
     relation as regards the astral world.

     When we have some kind of feeling, when joy or terror flashes
     through our soul, that, to begin with, is an event in our soul-life,
     but it is not merely that. If someone can test that clairvoyantly,
     it will be seen that something goes out of the soul like a current,
     like a shining current, which goes into the astral world. It does
     not go in casually, however, and without direction, but it takes its
     way to a being of the astral world.

     Let us suppose a thought arises in our soul; let us say we ponder on
     the nature of a table. Inasmuch as the thought shimmers through our
     soul, the clairvoyant can observe how a current proceeds from this
     thought to a being of the astral world. And so it is for every
     thought, every concept, every feeling. From the whole stream that
     flows away before the soul, currents continually go towards the most
     diverse beings of the astral world.

1908-10-26-GA244 Q&A 172.1

   (limited extract)

     Where do we place the 'Gemüt' in the structure of Man's nine bodily
     principles?

     Mainly in the consciousness soul .. [Vorzüglich] the 'I'.

     ...

     The German word for the active force in the soul is 'Mut'. When an
     attribute or characteristic becomes intrinsic, then this is
     represented with the syllable 'Ge' .. so 'Gemuot' is the same as
     'Gemüt'. The German word 'Gemüt' as an encompassing concept. .. The
     I develops in the consciousness soul. .. Through the consciousness
     the active element of the feeling comes in: Muot or Mut, the active
     that works in the soul.

     'Gemüet, Gemüot' .. means 'Gemüt' .. is the part of the soul that
     develops itself from intellectual soul, consciousness soul, where
     the Willing impuls hits in.

   1909-03-14-GA058

     When someone is born, his I and astral body, including his sentient
     soul, intellectual soul and consciousness soul, are by no means
     featureless; they are endowed with definite attributes and
     characteristics brought from previous lives.

1909-10-21-GA068B

   anger

1909-10-22-GA058

   The mission of truth

   synopsis:

   The I is confined between losing itself and egoism. Lessing demands
   that man strive for truth. A sense of truth leads to selflessness. The
   one-sided point of view does not lead to truth. Passions, desires, have
   to be overcome; to the same extent peace and harmony rules among man.
   There is the truth of reflective thought about outer observation, as
   well as truth which comes about by creative thought. Among the latter
   are the truths of spiritual science. Reflective thinking can lead to
   egoism; truths arrived at by creative thinking, which lead into the
   future, liberate us from our self. This is the contrast between
   Epimetheus and Prometheus. Both the Titan brothers must work together.
   Wisdom and the Word have to unite with the deed.

1909-10-28-GA058

   andacht

   The mission of 'reverence'

   synopsis:

   The “Unio mystica” is the union with the eternal-feminine within human
   reach. The human being should strengthen his I but he must not harden
   it into egoism. The will is able to develop devotion towards the
   unknown, the feeling develops love for the unknown. When both are
   united reverence comes into being, which leads to knowledge of the
   unknown. Love without judgement leads to sentimental enthusiasm. Love
   and devotion imbued with the right kind of self-feeling lead upwards.

   Gestures of reverence are the bended knee, folded hands, the lifted
   face. The soul purifies within itself a feeling for what is beautiful
   and what is good. The will, purified by reverence, builds up moral
   ideals. In old age the strength arises to be active in life. We draw
   near to the almighty, Increasingly rich knowledge is the result of
   educating the consciousness soul. The “eternal-masculine” must permeate
   all reverence. The strong Iascends to higher regions.

1909-10-29-GA068B

   human character (1)

1909-12-05-GA058

   The mission of anger

   synopsis:

   There are hidden faculties in the soul. Soul and spirit can issue only
   from soul and spirit. The fact of repeated earth lives is a consequence
   of this. The sentient soul is connected with the sentient body, the
   Intellectual soul with the ether body and the consciousness soul with
   the physical body. In the sentient soul lie images, antipathy and
   sympathy. The intellectual soul forms thoughts and judgements with the
   outside world. We have to make ourselves as many-sided as possible and
   overcome egoism. Anger can educate the human being to calmness and true
   gentleness.

   Prometheus brought language, knowledge, writing and fire to mankind,
   all of them gifts which educate the I. The wrath of Zeus extinguishes
   the power of the I in Prometheus. Zeus is succeeded by Christ, anger by
   the loving I.

1910-03-12-GA068B

   andacht

1910-03-14-GA058

   human character (2)

   Note: the date on rsarchive has the wrong year (checked against V1 in
   DE edition)

   synopsis:

   The divisions in the being of Man must be overcome by the unified
   character. At its foundation lies the harmony brought forth by the I
   from the interaction of the three soul members. The human being ripens
   through experience and wisdom learnt from life. Experiences are
   transformed into abilities. They are limited by the disposition of the
   physical and ether bodies. The forces which we have woven into
   archetype can only enter existence in a new life. The outer is an
   expression of the inner being.

   Laocoon, an image of the human being from which the I is absent. True
   ripeness of experience is not attained until the 35th year of age. Joy
   and love fill the physical body of the child with strength. Then there
   are fewer obstacles for the I in the period of the consciousness soul.
   Similar links exist between the ether body and the intellectual soul
   and the periods when they manifest themselves. The experience of
   authority in the period from 7 to 14 provides the foundation for
   courage. The ideals presented to the human being in the period from 14
   to 21 are imprinted on the sentient soul. Immersion in the cosmic
   secrets further remoulds the character.

   Character is evident in facial expression, the physiognomy and the
   formation of the skull.

1910-06-09-GA121

   see long extract on: Folk souls#1910-06-09-GA121 - advised to read in
   full

     If we wish to throw light upon the present inner being of man, we
     find it necessary to picture it as being threefold, as being divided
     into:
     * The sentient soul, which is, as it were, the lowest member of the
       inner human being,
     * The intellectual soul, the central member, and
     * The consciousness (or spiritual) soul, the highest member of the
       inner nature of the human being, in which the human ‘ I ’ is first
       actually brought to a state of consciousness.

     In the spiritual-soul is first to be found that which is called
     human self-consciousness. Nevertheless the ‘ I ’ of Man is active in
     all three parts of his inner life, in the sentient soul as well as
     in the intellectual soul , and in the consciousness soul.

     In the sentient-soul the ‘ I ’ is active in such a way that man is
     hardly aware of his I. In the sentient-soul, therefore, he is thus
     far given up to all his desires and passions. The ‘ I ’ broods dully
     in what we call the sentient-soul. It first works itself out and
     begins to appear in the intellectual-soul or mind-soul, and only
     becomes quite apparent in the spiritual-soul.

     If we wish to examine each of these three members of the human inner
     being separately, we must look upon them as three modifications, as
     three parts within the astral body. It certainly is the case, that
     these modifications, these three members of the astral body, prepare
     the transformation of the astral body itself, of the etheric body
     and of the physical body. But these transformations are still not
     what meets us as the actual human inner being or soul. The soul, the
     inner part of Man; consists of three modifications of the astral
     body. The three modifications must make use of certain instruments,
     and these express themselves in such a way, that
     * in the astral body the sentient soul is a sort of instrument,
     * in the etheric body the intellectual soul soul, and
     * in the physical body the consciousness soul.

     Thus we can distinguish the human inner being from that which is the
     human envelope or covering; so that therefore the inner nature of
     man consists of three modifications of the astral body.

     ...

     [see full lecture as it describes what is contained in these three
     members of the soul, how to distinguish them from one another]

     ..

     in Man the ‘I’, his highest member, encloses within itself the
     sentient, the intellectual and consciousness souls.

1910-06-16-GA121

     Therefore the East did not experience the whole process of receiving
     the ‘I’ as though coming from a higher spiritual world, with the
     assistance of a divine spiritual individuality such as Thor. This
     was experienced in Europe, and hence the European felt this gradual
     ascent to the individual ‘I’ as the emerging from a kind of
     group-soul.

     [group soul]

     The Germanic Scandinavian still felt himself attached to a
     group-soul, belonging to a whole community, as if he were a part in
     the great body of his people. Thus only could it come about that
     nearly 100 years after the Christ-impulse had been given to the
     Earth, Tacitus could describe the Germans of Central Europe as
     appearing to belong to separate tribes, and yet as members of one
     organism and belonging to the unity of the organism. At that time
     each individual still felt himself to be a member of the tribal ‘I’.
     He felt his individual ‘I’ being gradually born out of the tribal
     ‘I’, and in the God Thor he recognized the giver, the bestower of
     the ‘I’, the God who really presented him with the individual ‘I’.
     But he felt this God to be still united with the collective spirit
     of the tribe, with that which dwelt in the group-soul.

     To this group-soul was given the name Sif. That is the name of the
     spouse of Thor. Sif must linguistically be connected with the word
     Sippe-tribal relationship, and this connection really exists,
     although veiled and hidden. Occultly, however, Sif signifies the
     group-soul of the individual community from which the single
     individual grows forth. Sif is the being who unites herself with the
     God of the individual ‘I’, with the giver of the individual ‘I’,
     with Thor. The individual man recognized Sif and Thor as the Beings
     who gave him his ‘I’. The Northman still felt thus about them, at a
     time when to the peoples in other parts of Europe other tasks had
     already been given in the educating of man up to the ‘I’.

     Every single people has its particular task. There above all we find
     that people, that collection of peoples, that community of peoples
     whom we know by the name of Celts. The folk-spirit of the Celts—of
     whom from former lectures we know that later he received quite
     different tasks—then had the task of educating the still youthful
     ‘I’ of the peoples of Europe. For this it was necessary that the
     Celts should receive an education and instruction which was
     communicated directly from the higher world. Hence it is perfectly
     true that through their Initiates, the Druid Priests, the Celts did
     receive instruction from the higher worlds which they could not have
     acquired by their own strength, and which they then had to hand on
     further to the other nations.

     The collective culture of Europe is a gift of the European
     Mysteries. The progressive folk-souls are, as they progress, always
     the leaders of the collective culture of humanity. But at the time
     when these folk-spirits of Europe had to direct men to work from out
     of themselves, it became necessary that the Mysteries should begin
     to withdraw. Hence with the withdrawal of the Celtic element there
     took place a kind of withdrawal of the Mysteries into much more
     secret depths. At the time of the old Celts there was, through the
     Mysteries, a much more direct intercourse between the spiritual
     Beings and the people, because the ‘I’ was still united to the
     group-soul nature, and yet the Celtic element was to be the donor of
     the ‘I’ to the other part of the population. We might therefore say,
     that before the actual Germanic Scandinavian evolution began, the
     mystery-education could only be given to European civilization by
     the old Celtic Mysteries. This mystery-education allowed just so
     much to come to the surface as was necessary to form a foundation
     for the whole culture of Europe. Now out of this old culture,
     through intermingling with the many different races, peoples and
     subdivisions of peoples, the most varied folk-souls and folk-spirits
     were able to fertilize themselves, and they brought the ‘I’ into
     ever different conditions in order to educate it, the ‘I’ which has
     worked its way up out of the foundations of all that lies below the
     ‘I’ of man.

     After the old Greek culture had to a certain extent reached a
     culminating point in the fulfillment of its special mission, we see
     quite a different aspect of this same mission in the Roman Empire
     and its various stages of culture. We have already mentioned that
     the several post-Atlantean civilizations follow one another in
     certain order.

     [first Indian cultural age]

     If we wish to obtain a survey over these successive stages of
     post-Atlantean civilization, we may say that the old Indian culture
     worked upon the human etheric body. Hence the wonderfully wise,
     clairvoyant character of the old Indian culture, because—after the
     development of the special human capacities—it was a culture that
     was in the human etheric body; so that we may say, the ancient
     Indian culture is to be understood somewhat as follows (see
     diagram).

     From the Atlantean down to the later post-Atlantean epoch the Indian
     folk-spirit went through the whole of the development of the inner
     soul forces, without his ‘I’ being wakened. He then returned to his
     work in the human etheric body. The essential thing in the old
     Indian culture is that the Indian, with completely developed
     soul-forces, with soul-forces refined to the highest point, goes
     back again into the etheric body, and within that he perfects those
     wonderfully delicate powers, the later reflection of which we see in
     the Vedas and in a still more refined condition in the Vedantic
     philosophy. All this was only possible because the Indian Folk-soul
     had evolved to high degree before the ‘I’ was seen and realized, and
     this again occurred at a time when man could perceive by means of
     the forces of the etheric body itself.

     [second Persian cultural age]

     The Persian Folk-soul had not progressed so far as this, only so far
     as to perception in the sentient body or astral body.

     [third cultural age]

     It was again different at the time of the
     Egyptian-Babylonian-Chaldæan culture. That part of Man which we
     describe as the sentient soul was then able to perceive, and we must
     therefore describe this Egyptian-Chaldæan culture as working in the
     sentient soul.

     [fourth cultural age]

     The Græco-Latin folk-spirit was directed to the intellectual soul or
     soul of the higher feelings, and worked in that. He himself was only
     able to work upon this intellectual soul or soul of the higher
     feelings because it had a sort of expression of its nature in the
     etheric body. But this form of world-conception which now appeared
     in Greece was less real, as it were, less objective, it bore less of
     the stamp of reality. Whereas in the old Indian culture there was a
     more direct activity in the etheric body, there was a more blurred,
     a fainter image of the reality, which, as I have said, was like a
     memory of what these peoples had once experienced, a memory
     reflected in their etheric body.

     In the other peoples which then follow upon the Greek people we have
     to deal principally with the use of the physical body for the
     development, stage by stage, of the consciousness or spiritual soul.
     Hence the Greek culture was one which we can only understand if we
     try to do so from within, if we realize that in this culture what is
     important in external experience is that which pours forth from the
     inner nature of the Greeks. On the other hand the peoples lying more
     towards the West and the North have the task, under the guidance of
     their folk-souls, of directing their gaze out into the world, and of
     seeing what is there to be seen on the physical plane, and of
     perfecting that which has to play a part on that plane. The Germanic
     Scandinavian peoples had also the special task of perfecting this as
     they alone could, because they still enjoyed the blessing of being
     able to see into the spiritual world with the old clairvoyance, and
     to carry the primeval experiences which they perceived so vividly,
     into that which had to be arranged on the physical plane.

     [foundation - roman people]

     One people there was, which, at its later stage no longer possessed
     this blessing; which in the first place had not gone through such a
     previous evolution, but had been placed on the physical plane at one
     bound, as it were, before the birth of the human ‘I’ and therefore
     was only able under the guidance of its Folk-soul, of its archangel,
     to look after that which helped this human ‘I’ on the physical
     plane, that which was necessary for its well-being there. This was
     the Roman people. Everything that the Roman people had, under the
     guidance of its Folk-spirit, to accomplish for the collective
     mission of Europe, was for the purpose of giving importance to the
     ‘I’ of Man as such. Hence the Roman people was able to develop that
     which places the I among other I's. It was able to found the whole
     system of the rights of the individual. Hence it was the creator of
     jurisprudence, which is built up purely on the ‘I’. The relation of
     one ‘I’ to another was the great question in the mission of the
     Roman people.

     [mixtures of people - development of the threefold soul]

     The other peoples, which grew out of the Roman civilization, already
     possessed more of what—coming so to say from the sentient soul, the
     intellectual soul (or Soul of the Higher Feelings) and from the
     spiritual soul itself—in some way or other fertilizes the ‘I’ and
     drives it out into the world. Therefore all the mixtures of races of
     which external history relates, which occurred on the Italian and
     Pyrenean Peninsula, in present-day France and in present-day Great
     Britain, were necessary in order to develop the ‘I’ in the different
     shades of the sentient soul, the intellectual soul and the
     consciousness oul on the physical plane. That was the great mission
     of those peoples which gradually developed in various ways in
     Western Europe.
     * All the several shades of culture and the missions of the peoples
       of Western Europe can finally be explained by the fact that there
       had to be developed in the direction of the Italian and Pyrenean
       peninsulas that which could be formed in the ‘I’ through the
       impulse of the sentient soul. If you study the several
       folk-characters in their light and shadow sides, you will find that
       in the peoples of the Italian and Pyrenean peninsulas there is a
       peculiar mingling of the ‘I’ with the Sentient Soul.
     * Then you will be able to understand the peculiar nature of those
       peoples who till now have lived in the land of France, if you
       consider the growth and mingling of the intellectual soul, with the
       ‘I’.
     * The great world-historical effects, however, which we may consider
       as represented by Great Britain, are to be traced back to the
       impulse of the consciousness soul penetrating into the human ‘I’.
       With the world-historical mission that proceeded from Great Britain
       is also connected that which proceeded from the founding of the
       external constitutional form. The union of the consciousness soul
       with the ‘I’ did not exist as yet inwardly. If, however, you
       recognize how this union came about between the consciousness soul
       and the ‘I’ that had been driven outwards, you will find that the
       great historical conquests made by the inhabitants of that island
       proceed from that impulse. You will also find that what took place
       there in the founding of the parliamentary forms of government at
       once becomes comprehensible, if you know that an impulse of the
       consciousness soul was to be placed on the plane of the world's
       history.

     Thus many shades were necessary, for the several peoples had to be
     guided through many stages of the ‘I’. If we had sufficient time to
     follow these things on further we should find pictures in history
     which would show us how the basic forces branch and work out in the
     most various ways. Thus did the peculiar constitution of the soul
     work among the western peoples, who had not preserved in themselves
     the direct elementary remembrance of the clairvoyantly experienced
     things of the spiritual world of former times.

     [complex mixture & preparation]

     In later times, in the Germanic Scandinavian domains, that which
     proceeded directly from a gradual, successive evolution of primeval
     clairvoyance and which had already been poured into the sentient
     soul, had to develop in quite a different way. Hence that current of
     inwardness, which indeed is only the after-effect of a more inward
     clairvoyant experience gone through in a former age. The Southern
     Germanic peoples had in the first place their task in the domain of
     the consciousness soul.

     The Græco-Latin age had to develop the intellectual soul. But it had
     not merely to give the impulse with this soul, it had to work also
     with a wonderful premature development that was endowed with
     clairvoyant experience. All this was poured into the Spiritual Souls
     of the Central European and Northern Germanic peoples. It worked
     among these souls as an inner capacity, and the Germanic peoples
     living more to the South had first of all to develop what pertains
     to the inward preparation of the Spiritual Soul, to fill it inwardly
     with the consciousness resulting from the old clairvoyance, but
     transposed on to the physical plane.

     [german idealism]

     The philosophies of Central Europe, those philosophies which were
     represented by Fichte, Schelling and Hegel as late as in the
     nineteenth century, are apparently far removed from the sphere of
     mythology, but they are nevertheless nothing but the result of the
     most penetrating old clairvoyance, acquired by Man when he worked in
     co-operation with the divine spiritual beings.
     * It would otherwise have been impossible for a Hegel to have looked
       upon his ideas as realities, it would have been impossible for him
       to make the strange statement so characteristic of him, when, in
       answer to the question, ‘what is the abstract?’, he replied, ‘The
       abstract is for instance an individual Man who performs his daily
       duties, let us say a carpenter.’ That, therefore, which to the
       abstract scientist is concrete, was abstract to Hegel. That which
       to the abstract scientist are mere thoughts, to him were the great,
       mighty architects of the world. Hegel's world of ideas is the
       final, the most highly sublimated expression of the Spiritual Soul,
       and contains in pure concepts that which the Northman still saw as
       sensible-super-sensible, divine spiritual powers in connection with
       the ‘I’.
     * And when the ‘I’ was expressed in Fichte, it was nothing but a
       precipitation of what the God Thor had given to the human soul, now
       viewed from the Spiritual Soul in what seems to be the simplest of
       thoughts, the thought ‘I am,’ which is the starting-point of
       Fichte's philosophy.

     A straight line of evolution goes from the presentation of the ‘I’
     by the God Thor or Donar to the old Northern peoples from the
     spiritual world, down to this philosophy. This God had to prepare
     all this for the Spiritual Soul in order that the latter might
     receive its fitting contents, for its task is to look out into the
     outer world and to work within that world. But this philosophy does
     not discover merely the external, crude, materialistic experience,
     it discovers in the external world the contents of the Spiritual
     Soul itself, and looks upon Nature merely as the other side of idea.
     Take this on-working impulse, and in it you have the mission of the
     Northern Germanic peoples in Central Europe.

     Now, as all evolution has to progress, we must inquire: How does
     this evolution advance?

     When we look back into the ancient times we can see something
     remarkable.
     * As we have said, in old India the first culture took place in the
       etheric body, after the necessary perfecting of the spiritual
       forces had been accomplished. But there are other civilizations
       besides, which have preserved the old Atlantean culture and carried
       it over into the people of the post-Atlantean epoch. Whereas on the
       one hand we have the Indian, coming thus to his etheric body, and
       from this and its forces creating his mighty civilization and his
       magnificent spiritual life, ...
     * we have coming from the other side a culture which originated in
       Atlantis and continued to work on in the post-Atlantean epoch; a
       culture which for its foundation and development works out the
       other side, as it were, of the consciousness of the etheric body.
       That is the Chinese culture. If you bear this connection in mind,
       and remember that the Atlantean culture was directly related to
       what in our earlier lectures we called ‘The Great Spirit,’ you will
       understand the details of the Chinese culture. This culture was
       directly connected with the highest stages of the evolution of the
       world. But it still works into modern human bodies, and from a
       completely different side.

     It will therefore seem quite comprehensible that the two great
     opposites of the post-Atlantean epoch will one day clash in these
     two civilizations: the Indian, which, within certain limits, is
     capable of development; and the Chinese, that shuts itself off and
     remains rigid, repeating what existed in the old Atlantean epoch.

     [chinese culture and continent of Atlantis]

     You really obtain an occult, scientific, poetic impression of this
     Chinese Empire if you observe it in its evolution, and think of the
     Great Wall of China, which was intended to enclose on all sides that
     which came from the primal ages and developed in the post-Atlantean
     epoch. I say that something like an occult poetic feeling steals
     over one, if one compares the Wall of China with something which
     existed in former times. I can only indicate these things. If you
     compare this with the results that have been obtained by science,
     you will find how extraordinarily illuminating these things are.

     Let us clairvoyantly observe the old continent of Atlantis, which
     must be sought where the Atlantic Ocean now lies, between Africa and
     Europe on the one side, and America on the other. This continent was
     encircled by a sort of warm stream, a stream about which clairvoyant
     consciousness reveals that, strange as it may sound, it flowed
     upwards from the South, through Baffins Bay, towards the north of
     Greenland, encircling it and then, flowing over to the East,
     gradually cooled down; then, at a time when Siberia and Russia had
     not yet risen to the surface, it flowed down near the Ural
     mountains, turned, touched the Eastern Carpathians, flowed into the
     region occupied by the present Sahara, and finally streamed towards
     the Atlantic Ocean near the Bay of Biscay; so that it flowed in a
     perfectly unbroken stream. You will understand that only the
     remnants of this stream still remain. This is the Gulf Stream, which
     at that time encircled the Atlantean Continent.

     You will now also understand that, with the Greeks, the life of the
     soul is remembrance. The picture of Oceanos arose in them, which is
     a memory of that Atlantean epoch. Their picture of the world is not
     so very incorrect, because it was drawn from the old Atlantean
     epoch. The stream that came down by Spitzbergen as a warm current,
     and gradually cooled and so on,—the region encircled by this stream
     the Chinese have literally reproduced by enclosing within their
     Great Wall the culture which they rescued from the Atlantean epoch.
     There was as yet no history in the Atlantean civilization, hence the
     Chinese civilization is also in some ways lacking in history. Thus
     we have there something pre-Indian, something coming from Atlantis.

     Let us now turn, in the further progress of the Germanic
     Scandinavian folk-spirit, to the description of what follows it.

     [sixth cultural age of spirit-self]

     What happens first of all, when a folk-spirit so leads his people
     that the spirit-self can specially develop?

     Let us recollect that the etheric body was evolved during the Indian
     civilization, the sentient body in the Persian, the sentient soul in
     the Egyptian-Chaldæan, the intellectual soul in the Græco-Latin, the
     consciousness soul in our own, which is not yet completed.

     Then comes the laying hold of the spirit-self by the spiritual or
     consciousness soul , so that the spirit-self shines into the
     spiritual or consciousness soul, which, as that is the task of the
     sixth stage of civilization, must be prepared for gradually. That
     civilization, which must be pre-eminently a receptive one, for it
     must reverently await the penetrating of the spirit-self into the
     spiritual soul, is being prepared by the peoples of Western Asia and
     the Slav peoples of Eastern Europe. These latter were pushed forward
     with their folk-souls, for the very good reason that everything
     which is to happen in the future, must in a certain way be prepared
     beforehand, must already push itself in, in order to provide the
     elements for what is to follow.

     It is extremely interesting to study these advance guards of a
     folk-soul who is preparing himself for later ages. This accounts for
     the peculiar nature of the Slav peoples at present living to the
     East of us. Their whole culture gives the Western European the
     impression of being in a preparatory stage, and they put forward in
     quite a curious way, through the medium of their advance guards,
     that which in spirit is quite different from any mythology.

     It would be misunderstanding what is being pushed forward from the
     East as a civilization of the future, it would be misunderstanding
     this culture if we were to compare it with that which the Western
     European peoples possess, viz., an impulse that continues in a
     straight line, which is still rooted in and has its source in the
     old clairvoyance. The peculiarity attaching to the souls of these
     Eastern European peoples is expressed in the whole attitude they
     have always shown when their relations to the higher worlds have
     come into question. This relation, if we compare it with what
     appears in our mythology in Western Europe and the strange divine
     figures worked out even down to the individual character, is quite
     different. That which it offers appears to us in such a way that we
     may compare what it gives us as a direct out-pouring of the
     Folk-spirit, with our various planes or worlds, through which we
     prepare ourselves to understand a spiritual, a higher culture. For
     instance, we find there in the East the following conception: The
     West has received a series of successive worlds, lying side by side.
     In the East we find in the first place a distinct consciousness of a
     world of the Cosmic Father. Everything that is creatively active in
     air and fire, in all the elements in and above the Earth, meets us
     as one great, all-embracing idea, which is at the same time an
     all-embracing feeling, the concept of the Heavenly Father. In
     somewhat the same way as we think of the spirit world as fertilizing
     our Earth, so do we find this heavenly world, the world of the
     Father, coming towards us from the East, and it fertilizes that
     which is felt to be the Mother, the Spirit of the Earth. We have no
     other expression and can think of no other way of picturing the
     whole Spirit of the Earth than in the picture of the fertilization
     of Mother Earth.

     Two worlds, then, confront one another there, instead of single
     individual Divine Figures. And what is felt to be the Blessed Child
     of these two worlds, stands in front of them as a third world. That
     is not an individual being, not a feeling in the soul, but something
     which is the product of the Heavenly Father and the Earth-Mother. In
     this way the relation of Devachan to the Earth is felt from the
     spiritual world. There, that which blossoms in the material body is
     felt as something altogether spiritual; and that which grows and
     blossoms in the soul, is perceived as the world which is at the same
     time felt to be the Blessed Child of the Heavenly Father and the
     Earth-Mother. Universal as these conceptions are we find them among
     the Slav peoples which have been pushed forward towards the West. In
     no Western European mythology do we find this conception so
     universal. We find in them clearly defined Divine Figures, but not
     that which we present in our anthroposophy as the different worlds;
     these we find more in the Heavenly Father, the Earth-Mother, and the
     Blessed Child of the East.

     In the Blessed Child there is again a world which permeates another
     one. It is a world which is, however, conceived of as being
     individual, because it is connected with the physical sun and its
     light. The Slav element also has this Being,—although in a
     differently developed form of conception and feeling,—which we have
     so often found in the Persian mythology; it has the Sun-being who so
     pours his blessings into the other three worlds that the destiny of
     man is woven into the creation, into the Earth, through the
     fertilization of the Earth-Mother by the Heavenly Father, and
     through that which the Sun-spirit weaves into both these worlds.

     A fifth world is that which comprises everything spiritual. The
     Eastern European element feels the spiritual world as underlying all
     the forces of Nature and their creations. But this we must think of
     in quite a different shade of feeling, connected more with the
     facts, creations and beings of Nature. We must conceive of this
     Eastern soul as being in a position to see an entity in an
     occurrence of Nature, of seeing not only the physically-sensible,
     but the astrally-spiritual. Hence the ideas of an immense number of
     beings in this unique spiritual world, which we may at the most
     compare with the world of the Elves of Light. It is that spiritual
     world, which is looked upon in anthroposophy as the fifth world,
     which dawns more or less in the feelings of the peoples of the East.
     Whether they call it by this name or that, does not signify; what
     does signify is that the feelings are colored and shaded, that the
     concepts which characterize this fifth plane or spiritual world are
     to be found in the world of the East. By means of these feelings
     this world of the East is preparing for that spirit which is to
     bring the Spirit-Self into Man, in readiness for that epoch when the
     Spiritual-Soul shall ascend to Spirit-Self, in the sixth age of
     post-Atlantean civilization, which is to succeed our own. We meet
     with this in a very unique manner not only in the creations of the
     Folk-Souls, which are as I have just described, but also in a
     wonderful preparatory fashion, in the various externalities of
     Eastern Europe and its culture.

1914-01-24-GA266/3

     The consciousness soul, intellectual soul and sentient soul should
     not be completely equated with willing, thinking and feeling, for
     the latter are to be found in each of the three soul members.

     People who are more feeling-beings come to esotericism, and namely,
     especially those who have a religious bent. Such people usually get
     general ideas about the spiritual world and also Imaginations very
     easily. They're usually spared the things that make it difficult for
     men to ascend into spiritual worlds. Their worries are taken away
     from them by an angelic being, they're carried over the threshold by
     their angel. Such men can experience many beautiful things in the
     spiritual world, and when they speak about this we should listen
     well to what they tell us.

     Then there's people who come to esoteric development more out of the
     will that's connected with emotions and passions, and this can be
     connected with criticism and ridicule. It's more difficult for them
     than for the feeling type to get into the spiritual world. When they
     stand before the threshold they're tortured by their passions and
     emotions so badly that it can become physical torture. In their
     meditation it is as if they were being tormented and hindered by
     devils. They would like to enter the spiritual world, but they don't
     feel that they can.

     The third path through thinking is one that one can choose oneself.
     But very few people tread this path

1915-03-07-GA159

     The human soul can be understood in reality only if one knows that
     it consists of these three members. … Just as little somebody can
     study the human soul what is infinitely more important. For
     everybody should be a human being and everybody should know the
     soul. He, who does not feel in his soul that this soul lives in
     three members: sentient soul, intellectual soul or mind-soul,
     consciousness-soul, throws everything in the soul in a mess.
     * The sentient soul also is at first that what realizes, as it were,
       the desires, the more feeling impulses, more that in the current
       earth existence what we can call the more sensuous aspect of the
       human being. Nevertheless, this sentient soul contains the eternal
       driving forces of the human nature in its deeper parts at the same
       time. These forces go through birth and death.
     * The intellectual soul or mind-soul contains half the temporal and
       half the eternal.
     * The consciousness-soul, as it is now, directs the human being
       preferably to the temporal.

1917-10-08-GA177

   important lecture complementing Schema FMC00.428 and Schema FMC00.428A

   see: Thinking Feeling Willing#1917-10-08-GA177

Laocoön and Niobe groups

   1917-01-24-GA292

     This is the famous Laocoön group — the starting-point, as you know,
     of many an artistic discussion, ever since Lessing's Laocoön of the
     18th century. It is the work of three sculptors of the School of
     Rhodes. Lessing's writings on this subject are, indeed, most
     interesting. He tried to show, you will remember, how the poet
     describes is not placed before the eyes. We must call it to life in
     our imaginations. Whereas what the plastic artist has created is
     there before our eyes. Therefore, says Lessing, what the plastic
     artist portrays must contain far more repose; it must represent
     moments which can at least be imagined — for a single moment — in
     repose.

     Much has been said and written about this Laocoon group, especially
     in relation to Lessing's explanations. It is interesting how the
     aestheticist, Robert Zimmermann, — without, of course, having any
     knowledge of Spiritual Science — arrived at an explanation which
     needs, no doubt, to be supplemented, but which was none the less
     correct for an age that had not Spiritual Science. His explanation
     contains — albeit only as an instinctive suggestion — some element
     of what I have been setting forth today. We see the priest, Laocoon,
     with his two sons, wound around by the serpents and going towards
     their death. Now we cannot but be struck by the peculiar way in
     which the body has been moulded. Much has been written on this
     subject. Robert Zimmermann rightly pointed out: The whole
     representation is such that we have before us the very moment where
     the life (or, as we should say, the etheric body) is already fleeing
     away. It is already a moment of unconsciousness. Hence the artist
     represents it as though the body of Laocoon were already falling
     asunder. That is the marvellous quality about this figure. The body
     is already being differentiated into its parts. Thus even in this
     late product we see how the Greek was aware of the etheric body. He
     brings to expression the actual moment where life is passing into
     death. It is the quick withdrawal of the etheric body through the
     shock — the shock that is expressed by the awful snakes coiling
     around. This effect of the etheric body withdrawing from the
     physical, and the physical falling asunder, is the characteristic
     thing in the Laocoon; not the other things that are so often said,
     but the peculiar way the body becomes differentiated. We could not
     imagine the body thus, unless we conceived it as the moment when the
     etheric body is drawing away.

     ...

     To the same epoch belongs the famous Niobe group, Niobe losing all
     her children through the wrath of Apollo.

consciousness soul

1916-10-10-GA168

     The significance of all this becomes clearer if we give due weight
     to the spiritual-scientific truth that in the present age we are not
     thrown together by chance with other people. That the path of life
     brings us into contact with certain people and not with others
     depends upon the working out of individual karma. For we have
     entered upon a period of human evolution which brings Man's
     preceding karmic developments to a culminating point. Think how much
     less karma had been accumulated in the earlier periods of Earth
     evolution! With every incarnation fresh karma is made. At first,
     people had to meet under totally new conditions, with the
     possibility of forming fresh connections.

     .. through repeated Earth-lives we have gradually reached a point at
     which, as a general rule, we do not meet anyone with whom in former
     incarnations we have not shared this or that experience. And these
     experiences bring us into contact again with those who shared them.
     We meet other people as it would appear by chance but in reality
     because in former incarnations we had already met, and on the
     strength of this are brought together again.

     Now the self-contained consciousness soul can only develop - and its
     development is destined to take place in our time - when less
     importance is attached to what takes place at present between one
     person and another than to what works inwardly in solitude as the
     result of former incarnations.

     In the Graeco-Roman period two persons meeting for the first time
     made an impression upon each other which worked with the immediacy
     of a blow.

     At present, if a meeting is to take place that is to further the
     development of the consciousness soul, the moving factor between
     them must be what emerges in one or [the] other as the result of
     previous incarnations. This takes longer than recognition at first
     sight; it implies the gradual coming to the surface, little by
     little in a feeling, instinctive way, of what they formerly lived
     through together. What we ask today is that in becoming acquainted
     individual corners should be rubbed off. Because it is in the
     becoming acquainted, this rubbing off of corners, that the still
     unconscious, instinctive reminiscences and after-effects of former
     incarnations strike upwards.

     The consciousness soul can only develop when our contacts with other
     people are made from within; whereas the intellectual and mind soul
     develops more through immediate contact.

   quotes to be qualified (not yet identified but seemingly from this
   lecture)

   "As a rule, we do not encounter anyone we have not met in previous
   incarnations, and if the Spiritual Soul is to develop as it should what
   happens between people today needs to play a lesser part than that
   which works from the previous incarnation."

   "The task of the Spiritual Soul age, which will only be achieved at its
   end, is indeed the gradual development of community. The principle of
   love, which through Christ was born in the individual on the physical
   plane, now ascends to the soul world to lay hold of a group."

1918-12-28-GA187

   see illustration of this 'hollowness' on Schema FMC00.183

     ... in ancient times, particularly the pre-Christian, man's
     consciousness of self still possessed elements of reality, while in
     our own era, which involves principally the development of the
     consciousness-soul, there is only a reflection of the true I in what
     we consciously call our I.

     I have referred to this fact in public lectures by saying that a Man
     of our time, especially if he thinks he is a philosopher, does not
     arrive at the truth because he is confused by a philosophic maxim
     that plays a great role in today's world view, a role that is
     becoming disastrous, namely, the maxim “I think, therefore I am.”
     This Augustinian and Descartian maxim is not true for present-day
     Man. The true form should now be: “I think, therefore I am not.”

     A human being in our time should be fully conscious of the fact that
     in all he includes in the word “I” or “I am,” in all he holds in his
     consciousness when he observes his inner soul-being, he possesses
     only a reflection. This reflection even includes all the concepts
     directly connected with his I, concepts that must be worked through
     by his I. As humanity of this present age we no longer have anything
     of reality in our inner soul-life. The reality, our true being, only
     shines into us—I explained yesterday how it shines in—and what we
     bear within us is merely the reflection.

     [initiation]

     This fact will only become clear when we inquire into the science of
     initiation and observe the difference between the way a human being
     in ancient times could penetrate into the supersensible worlds on
     paths of supersensible training, and the way this is accomplished in
     our day. We will then be able to see that as we move on from the
     present into the future the paths into the supersensible world will
     be completely different from those of ancient times. This is
     especially what I wanted to make clear yesterday.

     ...

     Now we come to a fact that we have treated repeatedly from various
     points of view: namely, the change that is taking place in the
     constitution of the human soul. It indicates on the one hand the
     streaming forth of the revelation of the archai (Spirits of
     Personality); on the other hand, it indicates the liberation within
     the depths of men's souls of the impulse for freedom—a fact
     reflected now so urgently in the great demands mankind is raising.
     Today's social demands can only be understood if one is able to
     perceive this evolution in the constitution of the human soul. Call
     to mind a remark I made yesterday: that people are beginning—at
     least beginning, I said—to sense their true I when they come in
     contact with other people. The Man of old understood “Know thou
     thyself!” in the external world. For supersensible cognition it is
     different; but the Man of ancient times, when speaking of his I, had
     something real in the external world, the world in which the human
     being lives with his ordinary consciousness between birth and death.

     Modern Man has only a reflection of his true I; but something of his
     true I shines into him when he comes in contact with other people.
     Another person who is connected with him karmically, or in any other
     way, gives him something real.

     To express it radically: it is characteristic of human beings of our
     present age to be inwardly hollow - and we should acknowledge it. If
     we practice life-retrospection honestly and faithfully, we find that
     the influences other people have had upon us are much more important
     than what we ourselves have supposedly acquired. Present-day man, of
     himself, gains extraordinarily little unless he obtains knowledge
     from supersensible sources. He need not be clairvoyant. A person is
     driven to daily social intercourse because actually he is only real
     in someone else, in his relation to another person.

     As we approach the sixth post-Atlantean age, of which embryonic
     impulses are now present in Russia, this fact will become so potent
     that a current axiom will be: No happiness is possible for one
     individual without the happiness of all—just as a single organ in
     Man can only function if the whole functions. In the future this
     will be recognized as an axiom simply because it will be a fact of
     consciousness. We are still far from it—you may make your minds
     easy!—for a long time to come you will be able to consider your own
     personal happiness even though it may be built upon much human
     misery. But that is the direction in which humanity is developing.
     It is simply a fact, as when a man has a cold he must cough. He
     finds that unpleasant.

     Just so, a few thousand years from now, there will be unpleasant
     soul-conditions aroused when a Man wishes as an individual to have
     any sort of happiness in the world without its being shared by
     others. This interdependence of mankind is inherent in human
     evolution, and is making itself felt today in the social demands.
     This is simply the direction in which the human soul is developing.

   quotes to be qualified (not yet identified but seemingly from this
   lecture)

   "We have in fact only the reflection of our true ego in normal
   consciousness, but something of it shines in when we meet other people.
   A person karmically connected with us gives us something real."

   and

   "We are all in fact inwardly hollow, and we should really acknowledge
   it. If we honestly practice retrospection, we find how much more
   important are the influences others had on us than what we ourselves
   allegedly acquired. A person is driven to social intercourse because he
   is actually real only in someone else."

1923-01-30-GA257

     A world view such as that based on anthroposophy must always be
     keenly conscious of the time context to which it belongs. We are now
     living in the age of consciousness soul development, a condition of
     soul wherein the all-important thing is for individuals to draw
     their own conclusions and learn to give facts an unprejudiced
     hearing, so that they can then make fully conscious judgments.

     The style of my presentations springs from an awareness that Man has
     entered upon the development of the conscious soul. This accounts,
     as I said, for the varying conclusions that can be drawn from my
     words. I try to present the facts as clearly as possible. But there
     is never any question of “should” or “shouldn't.” Anthroposophy is
     there to communicate truth, not to propagandize. This has often been
     emphasized as, for example, in my refusal to take sides about
     vegetarianism. When I describe what effects a vegetarian diet has on
     people and what the effects of meat-eating are, I do so merely to
     present the facts, to make the truth known. In the age of the
     consciousness soul, anyone really acquainted with the facts of any
     case can confidently be left free to form his own judgments. It is
     essential to an anthroposophical view of things to be really clear
     on this point.

     ...

     ... we have to be clear when we are presenting anthroposophy that we
     are now living in the age of consciousness soul development. In
     other words, rational and intellectual capacities have become the
     most outstanding aspects of Man's present state of soul. Ever since
     the time of Anaxagoras, a philosopher of ancient Greece, we have
     been sifting every judgment, even those based on external
     observation, through our intellectuality. If you examine the
     rationalistic science of today, particularly mathematics, which is
     the most rationalistic of all, and consider the rationalistic
     working over of empirical data by the other sciences, you will form
     some idea of the actual thought-content of our time. This
     thought-content, to which even the youngest children are exposed in
     modern schools, made its appearance at a fairly definite point in
     human evolution.

     We can pinpoint it in the first third of the fifteenth century, for
     it was then that this intellectuality appeared on the scene in
     unmistakable form. In earlier times people thought more in pictures
     even when they were dealing with scientific subject matter, and
     these pictures expressed the growth forces inherent in the things
     they thought about. They did not think in abstractions such as come
     so naturally to us today.

     But these abstract concepts educate our souls to the pure thinking
     described in my The Philosophy of Freedom. It is they that enable us
     to become free beings. Before people were able to think in
     abstractions they were not free, self-determined souls. One can
     develop into a free being only by keeping the inner man free of
     influences from outside, by developing a capacity to lay hold on
     moral impulses with the aid of pure thinking, as described in the
     The Philosophy of Freedom. Pure thoughts are not reality, they are
     pictures, and pictures exercise no sort of compulsion on us. They
     leave us free to determine our own actions.

     So, on the one hand, mankind evolved to the level of abstract
     thinking, on the other to freedom. This has often been discussed
     here from several other angles.

     Let us now consider how things stood with Man before earthly
     evolution brought him to a capacity for abstract thoughts, and so to
     freedom. The humanity incarnated on the Earth in earlier periods was
     incapable of abstract thinking. This was true of ancient Greece, not
     to mention still earlier periods. The people living in those early
     days thought entirely in pictures, and were therefore not as yet
     endowed with the inner sense of freedom that became theirs when they
     attained the capacity for pure (that is, abstract) thinking.
     Abstract thoughts leave us cold. But the moral capacity given us by
     abstract thought makes us intensely warm, for it represents the very
     peak of human dignity.

     What was the situation before abstract thought with its
     accompaniment of freedom was conferred on Man? Well, you know that
     when Man passes through the gates of death and casts off his
     physical body, he still retains his etheric body for a few days
     thereafter and sees his whole life, all the way back to the moment
     of his first memory, spread out before him in mighty pictures, in an
     undetailed, comprehensive and harmonious panorama. This tableau of
     his life confronts a person for several days after he has died.

     That is the way it is today, my dear friends. But in the time when
     people living on Earth still possessed a picture consciousness,
     their experience immediately after death was that of a rational,
     logical view of the world such as human beings have today, but which
     those who lived in earlier times did not have in the period between
     birth and death.

     This is a fact that proves a signal aid in understanding human
     nature. An experience that people of ancient as well as somewhat
     later periods of history had only after death, that is, a short
     looking back in abstract thoughts and an impulse to freedom, which
     then remained with them during their lives between death and
     rebirth, came, in the course of evolution, to be instead an
     experience that they had during life on Earth. This constant
     pressing through of super-sensible experience into earthly
     experience is one of the great secrets of existence. The capacity
     for abstraction and freedom that presently extends into earthly life
     was something that came into an earlier humanity's possession only
     after death in the form of the looking back I have described;
     whereas nowadays, human beings living on the Earth possess
     rationality, intellectuality and freedom, exchanging these after
     death for a mere picture consciousness in their reviewing of their
     lives. There is a constant passing over of this kind going on, with
     the concretely super-sensible thrusting itself into sense
     experience.

Discussion

Note 1 - Terminology: 'Andacht'

   The German term Andacht is used and imported into English language for
   use within spiritual science, because the specific and rich intended
   meaning by Rudolf Steiner of this German word cannot be translated
   appropriately to English, without causing major misunderstandings when
   an existing equivalent English word would be used).

   This is an example where words fall short of intended meaning in a
   spiritual scientific context. In normal everyday use and waking
   consciousness there is no single word for the subtle meaning described
   and intended. In fact any word is just a 'label' for what is intended
   and described here.

   Hence, in this context and framework, translating the single word
   literally just does not work. 'Andacht' can not be translated by:
   attention, attentiveness, reverence, devotion, 'on-thought', or any
   single word.

   As described in 1910-03-12-GA068B:

     Andacht is that what gets aroused in the soul as inner impulses for
     the unknown, for what we do not know yet, as we can not understand
     it yet.

     Did we not have anything in us that points us to what we can not
     understand, then this urge and longing could not awaken, to come to
     the unknown. All that we want to understand and can only understand
     once we have entered into it, this first has to work in us in a dark
     way as yearning or longing in our soul.

     That what draws us into that, what we have not yet grown into, under
     what we do not find ourselves yet, but rather find ourselves outside
     of still, that is Andacht.

   Observe how what is described here links to how Rudolf Steiner
   describes the Parsifal attitude of asking questions, based on this
   inner voice. What is often framed or labelled the attitude of asking
   questions, finds it spiritual roots in the consciousness soul .. "what
   gets aroused in the soul as inner impulses for the unknown"

   .

Note from a reader (computer translation from DE) 2024-03

     You have not translated the word “andacht” and given an explanation
     of what it means and that it is not so easy to translate this word
     into English.

     This word also appears in the mantram

     Geist: Es denkt mich: Frömmigkeit

     Chr.: Es webt mich: Dankbarkeit

     Vater: Es wirkt mich: Andacht.

     Or in English

     Spirit: It thinks me: piety

     Christ: It weaves me: gratitude

     Father: It works me: devotion.

     Steiner often talks about this mantram, i.e. “andacht” in connection
     with the Father, as the highest part of the Trinity.

     See also wikipedia de.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andacht .

     Words such as 'Frömmigkeit, Dankbarkeit und Andacht' (piety,
     gratitude and devotion) only really open up when you meditate on
     them for a long time.

     In a conversation with a friend about the word gratitude, he said
     that I am grateful to God for my existence, for this and that. I
     replied that I personally cannot feel or have gratitude towards God.
     For gratitude, I need a direct counterpart. I can have esteem,
     respect and reverence for God, I can worship him. This refers to
     God, who is somehow infinitely far away, unrecognizable, in a
     certain sense also abstract.

     I can be grateful to Christ, who has bridged the infinite distance
     from God to me, to our world, who has come to meet me, so to speak.
     I have a counterpart, I can feel gratitude towards him.

     'Andacht' (devotion) towards God the Father: Turning towards him,
     orienting myself towards him, in a seeking movement of the soul.

Note 2 - On the consciousness soul

1 - Introduction

   Rudolf Steiner describes the threefold soul, with the third and last
   element in its development called the consciousness soul or spiritual
   soul. On this FMC wiki site we use the term consciousness soul, but it
   is spiritual in nature, and Steiner even calls it the 'actual I-soul':

   "in the consciousness-soul, the actual I-soul, is integrated the
   spirit-self or manas .. the spirit self (or manas) is enclosed in the
   consciousness soul" (1907-12-27-GA101)

   In this commentary we will try to bring these concepts to life with the
   help of a number of schemas to contemplate together. Below are thus
   offered a number of perspectives, as pieces of a puzzle to put together
   in your own mind. Consider it a jigsaw of 15 puzzle pieces (15 Schemas
   below) laid in seven moves.

   Study process note:
     * as other narratives on this site, the text below can be regarded as
       the basis for a voice-over explanation whilst projecting and
       'touring' fifteen schemas on this site (listed below), as could be
       done with a movie to explain the links and provide a multimedia
       version (maybe an idea for the future). The approach consists of
       providing multiple perspectives to unlock getting stuck in a
       sequential fixed frame of mind, and nearly automatically lead or
       force the mind into contemplation of the whole instead of just a
       single perspective.
     * the building on schemas as illustrations of concepts may come
       across as cumbersome, because it requires one to take the schemas
       and descriptions at hand. In today's world many people may probably
       not commit time and effort to go through this, as attention spans
       and concentration lower. However the intention of the narratives is
       to provide a guided study process for the earnest student of
       spiritual science who is on a quest for insight and willing to set
       aside and invest the time and concentration needed. The schemas are
       layered onto lecture references and so provide manifold links to
       the various perspectives underneath.
     * note: the goal is not to try and outline or define what the
       consciousness soul is with a short description, or some bullet
       points or facts from Rudolf Steiner's lectures. All the latter is
       embedded in the training materials on this site in various
       contexts, as exemplified by the synthetic schemas where the
       consciousness soul appears, eg Schema FMC00.047A, Schema FMC00.236,
       Schema FMC00.232, Schema FMC00.046, Schema FMC00.233 (just some
       examples, non exhaustively). However such small facts or snippets
       of info taken together do not help to develop a kind of
       understanding of what is truly meant with the consciousness soul.
       For this, all this info has to be projected into an overall frame
       of understanding first. Thén the schemas can be linked and added
       with meaning. The goal of the below is to first construct,
       initialize, such mental imaginative frame of understanding. It
       assumes a basic understanding of spiritual scientific essentials,
       so foundational base knowledge is assumed.
     * PS addition to the previous bullet, example from the anthrowiki
       page for consciousness soul:

     The consciousness soul (German: Bewusstseinsseele) is a transformed
     part of the astral body. During the Earth's evolution it emerged,
     when during the hyperborean time after the separation of the sun the
     earth condensed to the water state and the etheric body of the
     humans at the same time condensed to the light ether (Lit.:GA 13, p.
     225). The stimulators of the consciousness soul are the Jupiter
     beings (Lit.: GA 98, p. 198, GA 102, p. 59f). The consciousness soul
     is further formed by the I working unconsciously reshaping the
     physical body and reflecting this activity back into the astral
     body. This unconscious work of the I began at the end of the
     atlantic time and is striving towards a climax in our present
     cultural epoch. The consciousness soul is born as an independent
     member of the human beeing at the age of 35. Through appropriate
     spiritual training the consciousness soul is transformed into the
     imaginative soul (Lit.:GA 145, p. 176f). At the same time, the
     spirit self is already initially formed.

2 - Study approach with the FMC Schemas

Six viewpoints

1 - Schema FMC00.431

   (see above on this page)

   is a good entry-point for this. See below right on this schema,
   depicting that the spiritual flows in from right to left and hence
   fructifies also the intellectual and sentient soul. Granted that - as
   often - the schema is dense and so please study (as always recommended)
   the lecture references that provide the narrative.

   Repeated here is the text from the Schema, because it essential for an
   imagination of the consciousness soul:

   Important for the understanding of the consciousness soul is the last
   row, and the influx of the spiritual from the right to the left.

   As an additional metaphoric image, imagine osmosis or the movement of a
   less concentrated solvent through a semipermeable membrane to another
   more concentrated solvent.

   In this case, the spiritual ripples through from above downwards into
   the human bodily principles - a continuation of what is depicted in
   Schema FMC00.046 on Development of the I.

   Or also: "This constant pressing through of super-sensible experience
   into earthly experience is one of the great secrets of existence"
   (1923-01-30-GA257).

   Imagine that the spiritual intuition is an inner knowing that ripples
   through from the soul (so from the higher spiritual self onto our human
   I) .. not based on external information from the senses. So not based
   on processing intellectually what one has read, for example, but having
   an inner compass (barometer, gyroscope) that advises or guides one
   invisibly on the true north. One may wonder: how come that I seem to
   have this reaction, assessment, attitude in my soul .. inner knowing ..
   where does it come from?

   That is a way to describe the consciousness soul. It goes further than
   the smart intellectual and rational thinking (as a computer can be
   programmed to process information).

   Note that one does not always know the details of what one intuits this
   was, as in 'intellectual information' that one can explain. It is just
   there, and because it is an inner knowing feeling, it influences how we
   function. But it's not that we could go arguing about why, defending it
   with arguments or so.

   Please study the term 'Andacht' with what is on the Schema and this
   page to get into this more in depth.

2 - Schema FMC00.428A

   (see above on this page)

   provides an interesting view, because like FMC00.431 it illustrates
   "how the I plays on the instrument of the soul and the different
   strings of human soul life", however it positions the consciousness
   soul with the regular Spirits of Form and the Christ Impulse as
   countering the Luciferic influence.

   From this it but a small step to see how the development of Man's
   various bodily principles, and the threefold soul, are linked to the
   cultural ages of the Current Postatlantean epoch, because the spiritual
   hierarchies make up Man and are in continuous development themselves,
   they roll off the rhythms of the Cosmic fractal, see Spiritual
   hierarchies and their eigenperiods like the different interconnected
   wheels of a large gearbox.

   Specifically, see Schema FMC00.047 (and variants) on Current
   Postatlantean epoch: the threefold soul develops in the third, fourth,
   and current fifth cultural age.

   Hence we want to bear in mind our understanding of the Third hierarchy,
   and the chain 'SoF > archai -> archangels -> angels' that evolves Man's
   bodily principles and related consciousness.

   See also Schema FMC00.013 on on Current Postatlantean epoch. The above
   principle is why human consciousness (after having shifted already from
   atavistic clairvoyance in earlier epochs and ages, through the dark age
   or kali yuga, to the current waking consciousness), will evolve in the
   future from this mundane waking consciousness to a higher state of
   consciousness starting with imaginative consciousness - see Stages of
   clairvoyance.

3 - Schema FMC00.391

   (on Stages of clairvoyance)

   See the picture on the right of the schema, that depicts imagination,
   inspiration and intuition, and how the I and astral body have the
   consciousness experience in different ways, depending on this
   penetration and use of the astral, etheric and physical bodies.

   These pictures and schemas are of course all very simplified. Therefore
   next, we zoom into considering the astral body in all this.

4 - Schema FMC00.134

   Schema FMC00.134 (on Human astral body) illustrates the dual nature of
   the human astral body, consisting of a higher astral (refined part) and
   a lower astral.

5 - Schema FMC00.472A

   (on Development of the I)

   .. can now be contemplated to put the above elements together. It
   shows, in darker and lighter red, the higher and lower body (taken from
   the insert Schema FMC00.443, available on the same topic page)

6 - Schema FMC00.046 and Schema FMC00.569 with Schema FMC00.168

   The first two show the gradual evolution across epochs and ages.
     * First, building on the astral body description above .. Schema
       FMC00.569 (on Human aura) illustrates the spiritual I or mental
       body .. growing from black point (entry of the spiritual) to an
       ever-growing part of astral that is taken hold of and transformed
       (manas) and then beyond (further spiritualization). So the mental
       spiritual flowing in, taking on and growing beyond the
       astral-etheric-physical.
     * Schema FMC00.046 (on Development of the I) depicts the process of
       gradual dripping or 'rippling through', as sketched differently in
       Schema FMC00.569.

   .

   Note there is the first evolution in the Lemurian and Atlantean epochs,
   then the next iteration and layer in the Current Postatlantean epoch -
   see Schema FMC00.168 (on Recapitulation). So Schema FMC00.046 has to be
   'taken together' with Schema FMC00.168.

   The way to zoom into this important change in the current epoch is
   described on Transition between 4th and 14th century.

Importance

7 - Schema FMC00.468 and Schema FMC00.438

   Schema FMC00.468 (ao on this page) .. illustrates that the
   consciousness soul is the basis for spiritualization.
     * PS: why the consciousness soul as the most refined part of the
       purified astral body? for this first see Schema FMC00.261 and
       variants on Astral world; then check Schema FMC00.508 on
       Interpenetration of astral and spirit worlds along with the
       inspirational quote from 1904-11-10-GA053 on that page.

   It is foundational in self-initiation, as a person pushes off on this
   basis of consciousness for making a free choice out of a moral and
   spiritual awareness and self-consciousness, and takes on character
   transformation by introspection and self-assessment of one's
   Personality and the elemental balance. See more in Steps 2 and 3 in
   Bardon's IIH system of self-initiation.

   So the consciousness soul is the fulcrum (in french: point d'appui)
   that provides the basis for Man's transformation and spiritualization.
   Man becomes more susceptible and influenced by the spiritual, with
   growing consciousness of moral ideals, conscience, empathy as a step
   towards less selfishness and more selflessness and love. This is the
   transformation of the human astral body into manas or spirit-self (see
   causal body) part of Man's higher triad. This is then the basis for
   spiritual fructification by the Christ Impulse and the budhi spark.PS:
   why the consciousness soul as the most refined part of the purified
   astral body? for this see also Schema FMC00.261 and variants on Astral
   world

   That fructification is shown again differently by [6] on Schema
   FMC00.472. For a narrative that goes along with this, read
   Kundalini#Note 3 - The process of illumination

   Schema FMC00.438 illustrates this link between consciousness soul and
   Christ Impulse in a different way, from an evolutionary perspective.
   This has been prepared throughout the Current Postatlantean epoch with
   Two streams of development, and will deliver its fruits in the next
   sixth cultural age.

Extra notes

   1/ Schema FMC00.133 is not an ideal and probably debatable illustration
   regarding how it maps the illustration on the right to the one on the
   left. However its intention is to illustrate that the consciousness
   soul is truly spiritual in that it includes the manas spirit-self part
   (see also 1907-12-27-GA101 quote above. This is also illustrated on the
   right in both Schema FMC00.086 and Schema FMC00.218 on Man's bodily
   principles.

   2/ Now that we've gone full-circle in this tour, let's go back to '3 -
   Schema FMC00.391' above and read the quote from 1909-06-30-GA112: "when
   Man opens himself to the power of the Christ-impulse, the experiences
   of his astral body are poured into the etheric body and clairvoyance
   ensues.". This links to the new faculties that humanity will develop
   naturally in the future, see more on Christ in the etheric.

   3/ Furthermore, in terms of teachings and symbols, see Schema FMC00.114
   (and Schema FMC00.380) on the Parsifal topic page.

3 - The pivotal importance of the consciousness soul

   Sometimes a certain lecture by Rudolf Steiner captures the essence and
   'hits it on the nail' so clearly that such reference is really of
   value, and we ought to lifted out from the 100.000 pages text of Rudolf
   Steiner's Gesamtausgabe (GA).

   The extract below from 1907-11-20-GA100 (see also
   Mary#1907-11-20-GA100) coins the essence of the consciousness soul:

     Spirit-self is the same as the 'Holy Spirit', who according to
     esoteric Christianity, is the guiding being in the astral world.
     According to the same teaching, life-spirit is called the Word or
     the Son; and spirit-man is the 'Father Spirit' or 'Father'.

     Those human beings who had brought the spirit-self to birth within
     them, were called Children of God; in such men “the light shone into
     the Darkness and they received the light.”

     [editor: in this case the light is 'illumination', the life-spirit
     buddhi spark from the spirit-self manas, that is brought by the
     Christos principle]

     Outwardly they were, men of flesh and blood, but they bore a higher
     Man within them [editor: see Man's higher triad];

     the spirit-self had been born within them out of the consciousness
     soul.

     The 'mother' of such a spiritualised Man is not a bodily mother, she
     lies within him; she is the purified and spiritualised consciousness
     soul; she is the principle who gives birth to the higher Man.

     This spiritual birth, a birth in the highest sense, is described in
     St. John's Gospel. The spirit-self (or 'the Holy Spirit') pours into
     the most highly purified consciousness soul. This is referred to in
     the words, “I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and
     it abode upon him.” (John 1:32).

     As the consciousness soul is the principle in which the spirit-self
     develops, this principle is called the 'mother of Christ', or, in
     the occult schools, the 'Virgin Sophia'.

     Through the fertilisation of the Virgin Sophia the Christ could be
     born in Jesus of Nazareth.

   This essence is illustrated on the Schema mentioned above: Schema
   FMC00.468 or Schema FMC00.468A.

More

   Additional extracts from other lectures relate to this and we can
   stitch these to the above, as they shed light from various angles of
   perspective.

   .

   First, from 1908-05-31-GA103 (here SWCC, see also Mary#1908-05-31-GA103
   and Kundalini#Note 3 - The process of illumination)

     When the Virgin Sophia [consciousness soul] encounters the Cosmic
     Universal I [spirit-self manas cosmic principle] which causes
     illumination, the pupil is surrounded by light, spiritual light.
     This second power that approaches the Virgin Sophia [consciousness
     soul], is called in esoteric Christianity, the 'Holy Spirit
     [spirit-self]

   and

     .. the Virgin Sophia is the purified astral body [consciousness
     soul], and .. the 'Holy Spirit', the Cosmic Universal I [editor: the
     spirit-self, manas, which is a cosmic principle as it lies in the
     higher spirit world] which is received by the Virgin Sophia and
     which can then speak out of this purified astral body [consciousness
     soul]. ...

     Men of our age can receive the Virgin Sophia (the purified astral
     body [consciousness soul]) and the Holy Spirit
     [spirit-self](illumination) in the manner described, but only Christ
     Jesus could give to the Earth what was necessary to accomplish this.
     He has implanted in the spiritual part of the Earth those forces
     which make it possible for that to happen ...

     ...

     The Sun Logos ... became the Spirit of the Earth. This he achieved
     by entering into the body of Jesus of Nazareth in his thirtieth
     year, and by remaining active there for three years, after which he
     continued to remain on the Earth. Now, the important thing is, that
     this event .. must give something by which Man may gradually develop
     the beginnings of a purified astral body [consciousness soul] in the
     Christian sense.

     There had to be something there .. whereby Man could make his astral
     body gradually more and more like a Virgin Sophia [consciousness
     soul], and through it, receive into himself the Holy Spirit
     [spirit-self] which was able to spread out over the entire Earth,
     but which could not be received by anyone whose astral body did not
     resemble the Virgin Sophia [consciousness soul].

     ...

     the Gospel of St. John is the Gospel in which the writer has
     concealed powers which develop the Virgin Sophia [consciousness
     soul].

     At the cross, the mission was entrusted to him of receiving that
     force as his mother and of being the true, genuine interpreter of
     the Messiah. This really means that if you live wholly in accordance
     with the Gospel of St. John and understand it spiritually, it has
     the force to lead you to Christian katharsis, it has the power to
     give you the Virgin Sophia [consciousness soul].

     Then will the Holy Spirit [spiritual principle of manas or
     spirit-self], united with the Earth, grant you illumination or
     photismos according to the Christian meaning.

     And what the most intimate disciples experienced there in Palestine
     was so powerful that from that time on, they possessed at least the
     capacity of perceiving in the spiritual world. [see Stages of
     clairvoyance]

   Furthermore, from 1908-07-04-GA266/1 (see Kundalini#Note 3 - The
   process of illumination)

     The etheric body is loosened, lifted out of the physical body
     through the Christ Impulse.

     [editor: for the gradual loosening of the etheric body from the
     physical body, see Christ in the etheric]

     The etheric body is permeated by the Holy Spirit [spirit-self]
     through the Christ Impulse.

     And the Holy Spirit [spirit self] - our higher 'I' - causes forces
     to stream to us from outside.

   and from the same topic page and 1908-01-07-GA266/1, more
   physiologically

     When a person meditates, this awakens forces in and develops the
     pituitary gland, it begins to to shine brighter and brighter, sends
     forth rays, and gradually with its rays it encompasses the pineal
     gland lying in front of it, and stimulates it.

     This process organizes the organic formation of the astral body,
     from the chaos of feelings and sensations, into spirit-self or
     manas.

     When the pituitary gland causes golden threads to flow around the
     pineal gland, then the time has come when [the transformation of the
     astral body into spirit-self, into manas], has progressed far enough
     ... for the etheric body to be transformed into buddhi.

   .

   Just as the Schemas above provides a multi-perspective view, another
   such commentary, but even more broader and expanding and thereby
   'touring the whole FMC wiki site' is offered on Kundalini#3.4 - Putting
   things together.

   Or, one can start from Kundalini#Note 3 - The process of illumination.

Addition

Perspective 1

   by Martin O'Keefe-Liddard (2025-10): The consciousness soul: where
   inner work meets world engagement

   When we speak of engaging with world events today, what exactly might
   we mean by "inner work" in this context?

   Rudolf Steiner described the consciousness soul as fundamentally
   different from earlier soul configurations:

     "The consciousness soul is related to the outer world in such a way
     that it makes this outer world into its own inner content... It
     transforms the world into inner experience." (GA026)

   Might this suggest something remarkable—that the consciousness soul
   doesn't develop by withdrawing from the world but precisely through a
   transformed relationship with it? Yet Steiner was equally clear:

     "The consciousness soul can only develop if man takes his
     development into his own hands... The consciousness soul must be
     worked for; it does not come of itself." (GA186)

   So what might it mean to "work for" the consciousness soul whilst
   recognizing it unfolds through world engagement?

   Could it be that when we engage with current events—political crises,
   social injustices, cultural movements—and observe our own responses,
   we're already doing inner work? When we notice how thought immediately
   labels and judges, how conditioning colors perception, how reactions
   arise claiming to be appropriate—might becoming conscious of this
   activity itself be the work Steiner described?

   He said:

     "In the consciousness soul, thinking is no longer experienced as
     something given, but as something which man himself must bring
     about... Man must become conscious of his own activity in thinking."
     (GA009)

   Is this work done in isolation, or within every encounter with the
   world? Steiner emphasized that the consciousness soul is inherently
   social:

     "The consciousness soul brings about a consciousness of the other
     person... Through the consciousness soul we experience not only
     ourselves but also the being of others." (GA026)

   Does the consciousness soul develop through isolated introspection, or
   through genuine meeting with others? Yet he was equally clear about
   conscience:

     "Conscience is the voice of the true self... It is the consciousness
     soul becoming aware of moral impulses that arise from the spirit."
     (GA107)

   For conscience to develop, must we not distinguish these moral impulses
   from desires, instincts, and conditioned responses? Doesn't this
   require self-observation? When we make decisions—to respond to a
   comment, to attend an event, to speak or remain silent—can we catch the
   moment where will moves? Can we observe what motivates it? Whether it
   arises from conditioning or from something freer? Steiner offered this
   synthesis:

     "The consciousness soul must work in two directions: inward, to
     conscious self-knowledge; outward, to conscious world-knowledge.
     These are not two separate activities but one single activity seen
     from two sides." (GA115)

   Might genuine inner work today look like meeting world events with
   complete attention whilst observing one's own conditioning? Engaging in
   difficult conversations whilst noticing defensive reactions? Acting for
   justice whilst watching whether ego co-opts the action? Not inner or
   outer, but inner work tested through outer engagement, and outer
   engagement met with developed inner capacity—a single breathing rhythm?
   How might each of us explore this living integration that the
   consciousness soul seems to require?

Perspective 2

   For me the essence of the many descriptions we find in Steiner's
   anthroposophy of this, with so many words from various perspectives,
   were and are found in one 'simple' experience, the experience called
   'vacancy of mind' (or VoM) in initiation (e.g. IIH step 1). When in
   meditation one arrives at the point to have no more thoughts, one feels
   one's Self in full awareness as a spiritual being, free from the body,
   in full consciousness. This can be - often is life changing. Afterwards
   one can achieve this state with open eyes and ears in daytime or
   whenever. I wanted to add this because in anthroposophy we are working
   with the words of Rudolf Steiner, but these remain thought forms. We
   try to make sense of concepts, intellectually, we can remain in the
   intellectual soul. The term and concept 'consciousness soul' is an
   example, so is 'living thinking'. And imho (and I say this with the
   greatest love and respect and not as a critique at all), one (we all)
   can circle around the pool forever, but there is a way to feel the
   water .... And so personally I perceive (and this is meant in general)
   an unbalance between ... a lot of thinking (which we can do forever, ad
   nauseum) ... and focusing on the direct experience (which maybe we shy
   away from, or don't come to naturally). And I'm writing this because
   reaching VoM it isn't so hard to do really, one just needs to practice
   daily and persist a bit. But truly, it is a shortcut for which there
   are no words. And when one has the practice to be in that state a bit
   more, daily, all the words become alive with meaning in a way they
   otherwise never can.

   I know I am always putting on the same disk in the juke box, but I do
   believe it is essential. And of course it has been coined so many times
   before much more succinctly by wise teachers

   "An ounce of practice is better than tons of theory"

   "the science of initiation is the only possibility for the further
   progress of humanity"

   "If you want to awaken all of humanity, then awaken all of yourself"

Integration

   There's real value in your emphasis on direct experience rather than
   endlessly circling concepts. The point about lived reality of spiritual
   experience is well taken, and your concern that we can remain trapped
   in intellectual elaboration is entirely legitimate.

   I wonder, though, if we might add a complementary perspective? Steiner
   was quite consistent throughout his work—particularly in his Outline of
   Occult Science and Knowledge of the Higher Worlds—that what is achieved
   through deliberate initiation represents an advance attainment of
   capacities that humanity will develop naturally at later evolutionary
   stages. Initiation is, as he describes it, bringing into the present
   what would otherwise unfold in humanity's future.

   This isn't to diminish the value of initiatory practice—quite the
   opposite. It's to recognise that for most people, in this particular
   moment of human evolution, the path you've outlined may not be
   immediately accessible or even appropriate to their individual karma
   and development.

   What I was tentatively suggesting is something perhaps more universally
   available: the practice of observing one's own thinking, feeling, and
   willing as they arise in engagement with the world. Not as preparation
   for a higher state to be achieved later, but as the actual work of
   developing the consciousness soul now, in the midst of ordinary life.

   For many—perhaps most—people today, the consciousness soul develops not
   through achieving meditative states, but through learning to observe
   their own conditioning, reactions, and motivations whilst engaged with
   others, with world events, with moral choices. This too is direct
   experience, isn't it? The direct experience of catching oneself in
   reaction, of noticing when ego co-opts spiritual ideas, of feeling the
   difference between acting from conditioning and acting from something
   freer.

   Practice is absolutely valid and valuable. But mightn't there also be
   validity in suggesting that for many people, the "ounce of practice"
   looks more like: bringing consciousness to how they speak to their
   partner, observing their reactions to political news, noticing when
   they're acting from fear or love, catching the moment of choice in
   small daily decisions? This too moves beyond mere theory into lived
   experience.

   Steiner seems to have recognised this when he gave very different
   guidance to different groups—esoteric exercises to some, practical
   indications for social renewal to others. Not because one was superior,
   but because different individuals and different times call for
   different expressions of the same fundamental development.

   So yes, absolutely—direct experience over endless conceptual
   elaboration. But perhaps the direct experience available to most people
   now is the experience of consciousness observing itself in
   relationship, in engagement, in the challenges of social life, rather
   than (or as well as) consciousness experiencing itself in meditative
   states?

   Both paths honour Steiner's insight that thinking can become an organ
   of spiritual perception. Your path accelerates this through deliberate
   practice. What I was suggesting is that for many, this same capacity
   develops more gradually and naturally through conscious engagement with
   life itself—which is, after all, what the consciousness soul uniquely
   requires.

   Does this make sense as a complementary rather than contradictory
   perspective?

   - -

   I agree, it's not 'or' or but 'and'. Indeed clearly many people just
   don't go to the experience, and what you write also works - albeit much
   much more slowly and less efficiently, but the one certainly does not
   exclude the other. And so you are absolutely right: the large
   population of the Michaelic stream contains a whole pie chart with
   segments along a spectrum of spiritual maturity and different karmic
   background.

   The experience I mentioned has a breakthrough effect on the
   consciousness with which one functions in the world. And the other
   exercise in initiation, character transformation, is about living the
   better version of one-self consciously in every activity, daily, in
   every interaction. So it's also all very down to earth, if one picks it
   up in earnest. What I mean is that one should not see initiation as
   something far-off, not for me, it's basically about the same things,
   just more consciously and focused as a practice. And yes, as you write,
   of course it can come naturally and at a whole range of very different
   speeds, one can evolve with increasing conscious awareness. So we don't
   have any contradiction

   However there's another angle to it.

   How many incarnations do each of us think you have left, as an
   Individuality, to bridge from the lesser mysteries (worldview, symbols,
   spiritual science) to the greater mysteries (experiential)? How many
   incarnations to the sixth cultural age and sixth epoch? Do you feel
   that the 'all by itself' path of the wheel of karma corresponds to the
   change you want to make in the world, in what the world needs now?

   This relates to the reservoir of energy that one has filled, as fuel
   for the engine of will-power to act and transmute one's self towards
   love and moral ideals. And it is this which brings one naturally to the
   love of duty to spend a bit of time every day to what you know is the
   Work in front of each of us. The energy needed to take this step, for
   this impulse and traction of daily practice. I don't want to go and
   phrase it confrontational, but let us face the mirror and be brutally
   honest .. how many hours do we spend on screens every day (count!),
   other daily practices such as brushing teeth, etc .. so what is it that
   we don't have time for 20' a day like in the morning or evening .. to
   spend on cleaning our soul or be alone with one's Self? Is it like our
   pet animal cat or dog that does everything it can to not take the
   medicine we know is good for them and they need when we want to help
   and cure them?

   Let me add two more points to this:
     * 1) There's this famous short movie by Krishnamurti who says: your
       brains are being ever more entertained, the computers will take
       over - you have no idea of the future yet, but you'll have two
       options: be entertained like a plant, or go inside.
     * And 2), I will add, that today we are living in wonderful times,
       and humanity will face horrors in the future that we can not
       imagine today ... to eat the humble pie following our contemporary
       vanity, ignorance and materialism. These are not my words. And as
       some people know from having been to areas of war and famine, the
       worst conditions will bring out the very best in human beings, it
       is transformative for the soul. Then, with nothing left, more will
       be pushed into the pool and have plenty of time for the
       experiential.

   Knowing these two last considerations are more hefty, let's now bring
   all of these elements together, and let each person ask him or herself:
   are we cruising along just fine? there's plenty of time? etc .. or is
   there a burning platform that we can or should maybe kick our own ass,
   so to speak, or push the interrupt button and wake up to our better or
   higher self? What is needed, what do *you* need?

   I apologize if that last paragraph came across as too fierce or
   preaching, but I'm winding down already .. let each be and live the
   change you want to see in the world.

   But if only this drop can help in one soul, to touch the heart, so in
   the next incarnation one will cross the bridge from worldview to
   self-initiation, then writing this will have been worthwhile.

   - -

   This connects with the question of how we approach limits and timing.
   Perhaps when the Will is pressed by the notion of deadlines, especially
   those imagined as fixed through a finite span of incarnations, it may
   lose its living quality of openness. True willing has to come out of
   freedom not fear of shortage. However the will comes from the
   inside-out not outside-in.

   - -

   the links to the movie(s) There are various versions of talks, the page
   below contains links to excerpts of 1981, 1983, 1984.

   I also add a short 1' short extract of one of the movies.

   The link below also contains a shortened transcript with the key
   points: Mineral plant like spiders#1981-01-10 - Krishnamurti

   but it's different when you hear it ... "you don't see the seriousness
   of all this" .. "for God's sake realize"

   With regards the being conscious .. consider the developmental goal for
   humanity per evolutionary period, as Steiner pointed out (Schema
   FMC00.130).

   If spiritualization of part of mankind is described by RS for say sixth
   age of the sixth epoch, and the seeds for this are those in the sixth
   cultural age, before the War of all against all .. that's in just a few
   millenia .. then how many incarnations does this leave you if you want
   to develop spirit-self (manas), that is goes through the full
   purification of your astral body ... or life-spirit (buddhi) and the
   purification of the etheric body?

   * the sixth cultural age ... say the year 5000 is about 3000 years from
   now ... incarnating 600 years apart would mean 5 incarnations 'left'
   for making the key switch and doing the Work on the astral body
   fully... Incarnating per 300 years ... 10 incarnations

   * then to end of the sixth epoch ... supposed we have like 5 cultural
   ages and 2 incarnations per age left, that 10 ... or even double,
   that's 20

   Steiner pointed out that some incarnations are crucial, some much more
   important, whereas others not at all. And also that the current fifth
   and next sixth cultural ages are "the decisive ones".

   For quotes and lecture references,as a picture is a thousand words, see
   Schema FMC00.486 and Schema FMC00.052 and Schema FMC00.422A

Perspective 3

   by Annael

   The consciousness soul gives birth to the true spiritual human 'I',
   from the astral world to the spirit world.

   See left and right on Schema FMC00.508 regarding the Interpenetration
   of astral and spirit worlds, and more specifically see the connection
   between layers 6 and 7 of the higher astral world on Schema FMC00.261
   connecting to layer 3 of the lower spirit world Schema FMC00.136

   This means the soul is strongly connected with the moral foundation and
   every human being. So morality is the base upon which one must build
   one's understanding of the consciousness soul. That is why Rudolf
   Steiner mentions conscience, because it is connected with the Law of
   Morality.

   The task of the consciousness soul and the work on the astral body to
   spirit-self, is to start living and using the outer physical material
   world in such a way that the Law of Morality is fulfilled and
   manifested in every individual act, in every willful impulse, so that
   the world also changes to a more moral state. This is the task of
   cleaning or purifying the inside.

   Christ-Jesus told the Pharisees they clean the inside of the cup and
   plate first, so that the outside would also be clean, criticizing them
   for their hypocrisy in focusing on external purity while their hearts
   were filled with greed and wickedness.

   Matthew 23:25-26

     Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you clean the
     outside of the cup and of the dish, but inside they are full of
     extortion and self-indulgence. Blind Pharisee, first cleanse the
     inside of the cup and dish, that the outside of them may be clean
     also.

   Luke 11:39-41

     And the Lord said to him, 'Now you Pharisees, clean the outside of
     the cup and of the dish, but inside you are full of greed and
     wickedness. You foolish people! Did not the one who made what is
     outside also make what is inside? But give what is within as alms,
     and behold, everything is clean for you'

   What you said about "cleaning one's consciousness from every thought"
   is exactly this "washing the internal and external" about which Christ
   spoke.

   However with observation of oneself alone one does not just achieve
   this state of inner purity, when only spiritual essence lives (the Law
   of Morality, which was fulfilled by Christ) which can lead one to see
   what is moral and what is not, because there are "hidden sins" as it is
   spoken of in one of the Psalms.

Postscriptum

   why the anthro community (appears to) stay as if lost in the huge
   GA-forest of thinking (*). This is not a critique, the application
   areas have people in action, but spiritual science without the core,
   the 'mother' does not work.

   And, the spiritual worldview of the now public lesser mysteries
   naturally should lead souls to realize the key step for the individual
   is towards the great Work and what in our age becomes self-initiation.
   Maybe we are not yet at a sufficient stage of maturity of the
   consciousness soul.

   My conclusion and working hypothesis to date is that people do not
   'cross the bridge' from left to right on Schema FMC00.636 in the same
   incarnation. It's really like two separate communities. But I do
   believe it may well be that spiritual science today is charging the
   batteries to take on self-initiation in a next incarnation. So it may
   be just fine as a staging area and preparation.

   On (*) ... maybe the sheer volume of the GA is one reason, the
   intellectualization of current times, education etc a second,
   furthermore Steiner was teaching knowledge, intellectually (see
   comments to Schema FMC00.609, not all teachers did so), etc

Related pages

     * Human 'I'
     * Thinking Feeling Willing
     * Development of the I
     * Enlivened images
     * Aspects of human behaviour
     * Human temperaments

References and further reading

     * Owen Barfield: Of the consciousness soul' (1928, essay), also
       published in 'Romanticism Comes of Age' (1944, 1966)
     * F. W. Zeylmans van Emmichoven:
          + 'The Anthroposophical Understanding of the Soul' (1982 in EN,
            original in NL 1946: 'De Menselijke Ziel')
          + 'Gespräche über die Hygiene der Seele' (1946, 1988)
               o In twelve conversations with fictitious patients or with
                 friends, ideas are developed ideas on how people can
                 become mentally healthier. mentally healthier. Although
                 the book is seventy years old, the topics seem the topics
                 seem modern: restlessness, loneliness, mental turmoil,
                 fear. Zeylmans develops the dialog, perhaps a little
                 long-winded for today's reading speed, remedy:
                 rhythm,ideals, calm, self-knowledge, reverence. On the
                 one hand, the self-evident idealism against which these
                 remedies are presented; on the other hand, terms such as
                 “mindfulness”, “flow” or “resonance” are already on
                 everyone's lips again today. A “self-help book” on an
                 anthroposophical basis in the best sense of the word.
     * Karl König : 'The human soul' (1959 in EN, in NL 1964/1996)
     * Otto Julius Hartmann (1895-1985):
          + Die Frage nach der Seele: die menschl. Seele in Beziehung zu
            sich selbst, zu d. Mitmenschen, z. Weltall
          + Fragen der Seele in der Welt von heute
          + Von den Geheimnissen der menschlichen Seele (1982-84)
     * Robert J. Sardello
          + 'Facing the world with soul - The Reimagination of Modern
            Life' (1974 in EN, also in NL as 'De ziel in de wereld : Een
            andere, spirituele benadering van het dagelijks leven')
          + The Power of Soul: Living the Twelve Virtues (2002)
     * Jacques Lusseyran: Contre la pollution de moi (1992)
     * Joseph Ennemoser: 'Untersuchungen über den Ursprung und das Wesen
       der menschlichen Seele (1980)

     * John Gunning: 'The balance of the soul' ('Seelengleichgewicht'),
       articles Part 1 and 2 in Anthroposophical Quarterly No 21, issue 2.
     * Christof Gestrig: 'Die menschliche Seele. Hermeneutik ihres
       dreifachen Wegs'
     * Wolf-Ulrich Klünker:
          + Die Antwort der Seele. Psychologie an den Grenzen der
            Ich-Erfahrung (2006, in NL 2017 as 'Het antwoord van de ziel:
            Psychologie aan de grenzen van de ik-ervaring')
          + Anthroposophie als Ich-Berührung. Aspekte geistiger Begegnung
            (2013)
     * Wolf-Ulrich Klünker, Johannes Reiner, Maria Tolksdorf, Roland
       Wiese: 'Psychologie des Ich: Anthroposophie, Psychotherapie' (2021)
     * Johannes Kiersch: On Rudolf Steiner’s Conception of Consciousness
       Soul (2021)
     * Roland van Vliet: 'Freedom, the I and Love: A Philosophy of Love'
       (2022)
     * Roland Wiese: 'Die Entwicklung des Ich: Grundlage, Anregungen,
       Therapeutisches (2024)

   see also related under: Medicine#Anthroposophical psychology -
   psychiatry - psychotherapy

Various other

     * Thomas Moore: 'The planets within: The astrological psychology of
       Marsilio Ficino' (1982)

   Retrieved from
   "https://anthroposophy.eu/w/index.php?title=Human_character_-_the_I_and
   _threefold_soul&oldid=36328"

   This page was last edited on 16 June 2026, at 05:41.
   Privacy policy
   About Free Man Creator
   Disclaimers
   Powered by MediaWiki
   Powered by Semantic MediaWiki
