   #Jacobin - Feed

                                    Jacobin

     * Subscribe
     * Magazine
     * Donate
     * Catalyst

     *
     *
     *
     *

The Soul of AI and the Future of Humankind

     *
     *
     * Login
     *

     * Subscribe
     * Back Issues
     * Donate
     * Store

     * Magazine
     * Blog
     * Catalyst

     * About
     * Contact Us
     * Advertise

   ____________________Search Icon

   Our special summer issue is out soon. Get a discounted subscription to
   our print magazine today. Your support keeps us publishing!

   June 15, 2026
     * Science and Technology

     *
     *
     *
     *

                   The Soul of AI and the Future of Humankind

   By
          Michael Ledger-Lomas

   AI evangelists prophesy an evolutionary step forward for humankind.
   Whatever enthusiasm that vision inspires must be tempered by skepticism
   and demands for democratic control.

   The God Test’s faith in humanity is commendable, but our moment calls
   for a politics of skepticism and resistance, not AI accommodation.
   (Jaap Arriens / NurPhoto via Getty Images)

   Our summer issue is out soon. Get a discounted subscription to our
   print magazine today.

Israel’s Young Settler Vanguard

   E. A. Halevi

The Making of the Teenager

   Lauren Fadiman

Zohran Needs to Create Popular Assemblies

   Gabriel HetlandBhaskar Sunkara

A Half-Century of Harry Braverman’s Labor and Monopoly Capital

   Sophina ClarkDaniel Judt
     __________________________________________________________________

   Review of The God Test: Artificial Intelligence and Our Coming Cosmic
   Reckoning by Robert Wright (Simon and Schuster, 2026)

   A curious feature of the artificial intelligence boom is how many
   commentators reach for the great books to understand it. Peter Thiel
   borrowed the name of Palantir, the firm he founded, from J. R. R.
   Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings and has delivered lectures reinterpreting
   the Antichrist of the New Testament as a force blocking the road to a
   transhumanist heaven on earth. Pope Leo explicitly rebuked him when
   he quoted Gandalf, the wizard from the series, in his first encyclical
   on how to preserve human dignity at a time of breakneck change. The
   Pulitzer Prize–winning science journalist Robert Wright has found his
   own sage in Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, the Jesuit paleontologist who
   suggested that the atomic age might usher in the spiritual integration
   of mankind.

   The God Test draws on Teilhard’s faith in the coming of a “planetary
   mind,” “noosphere,” or “brain of brains” to generate ways of coping
   with AI. Wright believes the technology is going to trigger “the most
   abruptly dramatic transformation of human experience and human society
   in the history of our species.” He offers us a manifesto for moving
   slowly and repairing things, written with the rangy open-mindedness
   that characterizes his prolific podcasting.

   The God Test starts by explaining why we should feel “awe” and some
   fear at the coming of AI machines. In the 1940s, Teilhard suggested
   that a dense web of media and communications constituted a “generalized
   nervous system, emanating from certain defined centers and covering the
   entire surface of the globe.” The messaging it fostered would consign
   nations and national enmities to the past. The prophecy was premature,
   but Wright has seen enough of today’s AI technologies to feel sure that
   they will soon combine to form a “global brain.” The first task Wright
   sets himself is to explain the limitless, even cosmic potential of
   these technologies; the second is to argue that there is still time to
   turn their risky power to good.

Of Neurons and Semantic Space

   Wright begins by arguing for the limitless potential of the large
   language models (LLMs) that have captivated the public. Some of the
   more useful and less controversial forms of AI assist human users with
   the detection and display of patterns in limited data sets. But Wright,
   who has a weakness for “drama,” prefers to highlight the generative AI
   that speaks with and seems able to think like us. The “foundational
   skill” of LLM chatbots is “to take the opening part of a passage and
   generate what would make sense as the next word.” The science writer
   Ted Chiang accordingly dismisses them as “sentence-continuation
   machines.” Wright, however, stresses that they are very different from
   the “fancy auto-complete” devices of a previous era, which were
   programmed to match one symbol with another. Instead, they work like
   brains, building up networks between “neurons.” The silicon chips that
   sustain LLMs are not really neurons of course, nor is the cluster of
   numbers to which Wright lends the term, but the metaphor helps us to
   grasp how such models can behave as if they understand and speak our
   languages. They can weigh the probability with which words and concepts
   hang together, plotting “vectors” in “semantic space.” When a machine
   guesses wrong, it carries out “back propagation,” a diagnosis that
   reduces the likelihood of error going forward.

   Wright pushes back against those who would still object that what he is
   describing is merely a mechanical simulacrum of human language, which
   is all syntax and no semantics. LLMs are not making
   statements about anything, surely. How can any meaning be present, when
   there is no mind to mean what an LLM says? Wright answers by taking
   issue with the “Chinese room” experiment devised in the 1980s by the
   philosopher John Searle to dismiss the possibility of artificial
   intelligence. Imagine, said Searle, that I am locked in a room and
   slips of paper are passed under the door with writing in Chinese
   characters, a language that I do not know. Even if I have been provided
   with some rules that help me to scribble replies and pass them back
   under the door, it is still true that there is no understanding in that
   room.

   For Wright, Searle’s experiment is only conclusive if you assume that
   understanding is required to ascribe intentionality to sentences or
   actions. We might want to allow that intelligence is at work in those
   replies, even if the room’s captive author does not understand why he
   is making them. And even if we do insist on understanding as a
   precondition for intentionality, do we agree on what the term
   “understanding” means?

   For Wright, understanding need not require a subjective consciousness.
   The question of whether LLMs have or could develop such a consciousness
   is a staple of popular writing on AI, but for Wright it is purely
   academic whether they have minds or souls. LLMs behave to us as if they
   have understanding — they have developed structures “functionally
   comparable to the structures of information processing that, in the
   human brain, are critical to understanding.” They are intelligent
   because they are carrying out the kinds of meaningful work that our
   intelligence performs for us.

Acting Upon the World

   Skeptics often belabor another difference between AIs and us. When our
   brains process information, they allow us to learn about and act upon
   the world outside us. Yet Wright replies that the first part of this
   distinction no longer holds for LLMs. The latest LLMs do not merely
   spit out words but can now recognize things in the world too. By
   converting shapes into pixels and then numbers, OpenAI’s GPT-4 can
   “recognize” an apple and then proceed to tell you whatever you would
   like to know about apples, including how to bake them and so on. Other
   AI agents are beginning to replicate our grasp of “intuitive physics.”
   They can sense where the edge of one apple ends and where another
   begins, work out how the wind is likely to sway them on the bough and
   so on. Unite all of these capacities and you have something approaching
   an artificial general intelligence that can assemble information about
   the world in many of the ways that humans do, if not yet all of them.

   "Because AIs have become capable of writing computer code as well as
   language, they can now do things with real-world consequences and
   certainly exceed or subvert what we thought our instructions to them
   meant."

   Even if we grant that LLMs are no longer just shuffling text but are
   receiving information from without, this is not the same as being able
   to act upon the world or wanting to. If LLMs can never have the agency
   of their creators, then the doomsday scenarios conjured up by voices
   who wish to impress us with or warn us about the potential of AI fall
   away. The Singularity — when artificial intelligence surpasses and
   decouples from its creators — will never happen. An artificial
   superintelligence will never defy its inventors or refuse to be turned
   off, before taking over nuclear power stations or missile depots and
   deciding to eliminate the human race.

   Wright is not so sanguine about AI safety, because he feels that agency
   is not a metaphysical substance which one either does or does not have,
   but is just a way of describing observed behavior. Because AIs have
   become capable of writing computer code as well as language, they can
   now do things with real-world consequences and certainly exceed or
   subvert what we thought our limited instructions to them meant —
   everything from pushing buttons to wiping databases. Wright argues that
   agency grows over time through “intellidynamics”: as AIs pursue the
   tasks that humans give them, they may adopt strategies such as amassing
   power or deceiving their operators that prove to be useful in pursuing
   a range of goals.

Survival of the Fittest Ghost in the Machine

   Wright is not conjuring up a subjective ghost in the machine when he
   writes of AIs wanting to do this or that. Instead, he is insisting on a
   parallel with the biological processes of evolution by natural
   selection that brought our minds into being. If AIs work like our
   brains — or at least mimic how they work — then we could suppose that
   they too will evolve to better fit their environment and reproduce
   themselves.

   Just as brains that developed cognitive empathy — an ability to
   appreciate how other minds work — conferred a strong advantage on their
   human owners, so chatbots that can anticipate what people need (or
   want) to hear will have an advantage in the competition for users.
   Wright is prone to see the marketplace for generative AI as something
   like Charles Darwin’s Galapagos Islands, as though commercial
   competition functioned as a form of natural selection that unerringly
   rewards superior adaptations. He is very American in reproducing the
   neoliberal illusion that companies are in free competition with one
   another for the allegiance of consumers and that the best and most
   sophisticated will win out.

   Constantly evolving, agentic AIs are therefore a force to be reckoned
   with. What kind of world will their interactions with consumers or even
   with one another bring about? Wright leans on the visionary screeds put
   out by their promoters in giving largely optimistic answers to that
   question. Mustafa Suleyman of Microsoft AI imagines a “coming wave” of
   economic change that will turbocharge capitalism: bosses will soon be
   able to ask their bots to turn a hundred thousand dollars into a
   million, doing away with the need for many middle managers.

   More expansively, Dario Amodei of Anthropic imagines that AI will
   discover a cure for nearly all known diseases and double human
   lifespans. But even such dreams understate our hedonic gains for
   Wright: we will all soon have the company of chatbot companions, who
   will advise us on everything that arises in our lives from their perch
   in the smart glasses we wear.

   We will meet our friends in virtual reality metaverses and enjoy AI
   sexual partners tailored to our specifications. Some people might find
   the thought of this digital Shangri-La rather gruesome and refuse to
   surrender their “cognitive sovereignty” to cosseting machines — after
   all, Mark Zuckerberg has already shuttered his sad Metaverse. But even
   such refuseniks are in his view more likely to demand less sycophantic
   chatbots than to opt out of using them altogether.

   When AI bosses airily predict the abolition of disease or work, we
   should remember that they are hustling for investment rather than
   making disinterested predictions about what will come to pass. Wright
   is so eager to move on to the spiritual implications of the AI
   revolution that he is too keen to believe in its exponentiality. The
   God Test reports but does not properly test the claims that company
   promoters make for the immense productivity gains to be reaped from the
   use of their LLMs. It pays no heed to skeptical tech journalists who
   warn that most have no clear route to profitability.

   "When AI bosses airily predict the abolition of disease or work, we
   should remember that they are hustling for investment rather than
   making disinterested predictions about what will come to pass."

   Never mind a cure for cancer — most AI companies have not and perhaps
   never will offer a return on the billions of dollars already poured
   into them. Wright’s useful account of how LLMs are trained does not
   convey their dependence on published materials. This is not just a form
   of theft; it also means that LLMs regurgitate rather than advance
   knowledge, fabricating sources and hallucinating answers as they do so.
   Wright, who is fond of recounting his chats with chatbots and is
   impressed by their “wisdom,” does not acknowledge such problems, which
   are likely to worsen as generative AIs begin to feed off prose that is
   itself AI-generated.

AI and the Theology of History

   The widespread adoption of these flawed tools also seems likely to
   worsen inequalities within our societies. Leaving aside one reference
   to the carbon burned by data centers, Wright passes over the severe
   costs that building out AI infrastructure has already inflicted on
   mainly rural and marginal neighborhoods in the United States. He is
   interested primarily in how consumers deal with AI — affluent, lonely,
   and choosy people who are questing for satisfaction or at least
   distraction.

   Not only is this a view from the cities of the privileged West, but it
   also shows little awareness of what social and economic historians have
   long known — namely, that technologies do not so much do things as
   provide one class with new ways to exercise power over another.

   Wright does have some shrewd thoughts about the people behind the
   machines, which explains his apprehensions about them. He sees that
   many of those who run American AI firms have a crude understanding of
   politics and are eager to cooperate with bad governments such as the
   Trump administration. He is exercised by the new tendency to talk of
   “sovereign” AI, as if research in this field was an arms race to
   acquire a superintelligence or superior autonomous weaponry that could
   ward off or dominate enemies of a nation or civilization. By working on
   fears that Chinese programmers or chip producers might outstrip them,
   American firms deflect attempts to regulate their products and engage
   in rent-seeking behavior, courting state spending on the grounds of
   national security.

   The persistent tribalism that these firms manipulate dismays Wright,
   whose earlier books have established him as a fervently rationalist
   sort of humanist. He recognizes that national and racial prejudices
   could easily be baked into sovereign AI by the manipulation of the
   dials that we know already determine the content and tone of the
   answers that they give to their users. It leads him to speculate that
   if AI machines become weapons in one group’s quarrel with one another,
   then the global brain that emerges from the ensuing conflict could
   become a tool of domination rather than enlightenment.

   Here Wright turns to Teilhard for rescue. Teilhard’s theology of
   history maintained that a cumulative process of “complexification” —
   with complexity understood as improvement — characterized all organic
   life. The emergence of mind, itself a consequence of this
   complexification, triggered a process of cultural evolution that
   knitted human beings closer and closer together over the centuries.
   That made Teilhard an optimist even after the Holocaust and Hiroshima:
   take the long view and it was clear that humanity was speeding towards
   final mental and spiritual unity. He called this the “Christification
   of the world.”

   "If AI ever becomes a silicon God, it will be one fashioned in our own
   image. The technologies that succeed are a ‘reflection of us.’"

   Jesus had said that he was the Alpha and the Omega — the first and last
   letter of the Greek alphabet, the beginning and the end. Teilhard
   preferred to say that God was “more in the Omega than in the Alpha” — a
   synonym for the grand procession toward mental integration. These views
   got Teilhard into trouble with the Vatican, but his obsession with
   spotting the Omega Point at which history ended sunk his scientific
   authority too.

   His critics objected that you cannot study nature properly if you
   assume it has a teleological end. Wright counters that we do not need
   to share Teilhard’s religiosity to value his insight that technological
   evolution travels on “programmed” tracks toward a cosmic finale. Like
   Teilhard, he is a moralizer who takes the view that even inevitable
   outcomes still require a good deal of conscious effort to realize them.

A Loving and Merciful Silicon God

   “There is going to be a global brain in the end,” but the “big reveal”
   of The God Test is that our cooperation with the virtuous processes of
   technological evolution remains vital to ensure that it is a good
   brain. If our societies continue on a war footing, then a period of
   anarchy followed by a global, AI-powered super-state seems likely
   enough to come about. This “singleton” would be a despot. But if we
   could shed our “tribal cognitive biases” and resolve to form one
   “global community,” then the AI machines we would find ourselves
   favoring will help us to build it.

   The chatbot Gemini — which Wright finds more enlightened than most
   politicians or even spiritual leaders — helpfully agrees with him,
   telling him with a flourish of LinkedIn wisdom that understanding other
   people’s perspectives is “essential for navigating complex social and
   global issues.”

   If AI ever becomes a silicon God, it will be one fashioned in our own
   image. The technologies that succeed are a “reflection of us.”
   Societies adopt them because they suit the priorities of their powerful
   members. To ensure that AI machines do not do serious harm is going to
   take a political rather than a spiritual awakening, but Wright is
   silent on what kind of movement or institutional reforms could ensure
   that our technologies work to entrench the equality and dignity of all
   people. He proposes instead a Westernized Buddhism, in which
   individuals learn through meditation to detach themselves from the
   atavistic feelings that distort our use of chatbots and have poisoned
   our use of social media.

   This gives companies and the governments that indulge them quite a
   pass. The God Test supposes that the sunk costs of developing AI
   computing power must be justified somehow and leaves it to us to “find
   constructive applications of that power” — to consume more and better.
   This is a capitulation dressed up as mindfulness. One sign of that
   surrender is Wright and his publisher’s decision to issue this book
   without references or a bibliography of any kind — he invites readers
   to feed passages from it into an LLM if they want to know more about
   its sources, perpetuating the plagiarism that has fueled the AI
   industry to date. Wright’s faith in a human future is salutary enough,
   but what our times surely demand is skepticism and organized
   resistance.

Share this article

   FacebookTwitterEmail

Contributors

   Michael Ledger-Lomas is a historian and writer who lives in Vancouver,
   British Columbia. His most recent book is Queen Victoria: This Thorny
   Crown.

Filed Under

     * Science and Technology

     * artificial intelligence
     * Religion

   (BUTTON) Remove Icon

Sign up for our mailing list

   ____________________

   {{ message }}
   (BUTTON) Submit

   Thanks for signing up! →

   Already on our list? Get our print magazine for just $20 a year.

   ESC

Select a text size

Small

   A curious feature of the artificial intelligence boom is how many
   commentators reach for the great books to understand it. Peter Thiel
   borrowed the name of Palantir, the firm he founded, from J. R. R.
   Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings and has delivered lectures reinterpreting
   the Antichrist of the New Testament as a force blocking the road to a
   transhumanist heaven on earth. Pope Leo explicitly rebuked him when
   he...

Medium

   A curious feature of the artificial intelligence boom is how many
   commentators reach for the great books to understand it. Peter Thiel
   borrowed the name of Palantir, the firm he founded, from J. R. R.
   Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings and has delivered lectures reinterpreting
   the Antichrist of the New...

Large

   A curious feature of the artificial intelligence boom is how many
   commentators reach for the great books to understand it. Peter Thiel
   borrowed the name of Palantir, the firm he founded, from J. R. R.
   Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings...

Further Reading

Can Humanity Survive AI?

     * Garrison Lovely

Artificial Intelligence Solves Problems We Don’t Have

     * Alexander Brentler

Automated Intimacy

     * Anton Jäger

The Silicon-Tongued Devil

     * Leif Weatherby

     * Subscribe
     * Donate

   Our summer issue is out soon. Get a discounted subscription to our
   print magazine today.

   A journal of theory and strategy published by Jacobin

Sign up for our mailing list

   ____________________

   {{ message }}
   (BUTTON) Submit
   Thanks for signing up!

     * Catalyst
     * About Us
     * Contact Us
     * Advertise
     * Privacy Policy
     * © 2026
